		<section id="dedication-1" epub:type="dedication">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Dedication to the Edition of 1590</h2>
			<p>
				<b>To the most migh—<br/>
				tie and magnifi—<br/>
				cent Empresse Eli—<br/>
				zabeth, by the<br/>
				grace of God Queene<br/>
				of England, France<br/>
				and Ireland de<br/>
				fender of the faith</b>
				<br/>
				etc.</p>
			<footer>
				<p>Her most humble<br/>
				Servant:</p>
				<p>Ed. Spenser.</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
		<section id="dedication-2" epub:type="dedication">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Dedication to the Edition of 1596</h2>
			<p><b>To<br/>
			the most high,<br/>
			mightie</b><br/>
			And<br/>
			<b>magnificent<br/>
			Empresse renovv—<br/>
			med for pietie, ver—<br/>
			tve, and all gratiovs<br/>
			government Elizabeth by<br/>
			the grace of God Qveene<br/>
			of England Fravnce and<br/>
			Ireland and of Virgi—<br/>
			nia, defendovr of the<br/>
			faith</b>, etc. <b>Her most<br/>
			hvmble servavnt<br/>
			Edmvnd spenser<br/>
			doth in all hv—<br/>
			militie dedi—<br/>
			cate, pre—<br/>
			sent<br/>
			and consecrate these<br/>
			his labovrs to live<br/>
			with the eterni—<br/>
			tie of her<br/>
			fame</b></p>
		</section>
		<section id="dedication-3" epub:type="dedication">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Dedicatory Sonnets</h2>
			<section id="sonnet-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Sonnet</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">To the Right honourable Sir Christopher Hatton, Lord high Chauncelor of England, etc.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Those prudent heads, that with their counsels wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whylom the pillours of th'earth did sustaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And taught ambitious Rome to tyrannise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the neck of all the world to rayne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oft from those grave affaires were wont abstaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the sweet Lady Muses for to play:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So Ennius the elder Africane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So Maro oft did Caesars cares allay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So you, great Lord, that with your counsell sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The burdeine of this kingdom mightily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With like delightes sometimes may eke delay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rugged brow of carefull Policy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to these ydle rymes lend litle space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which for their titles sake may find more grace.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sonnet-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Sonnet</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">To the right honourable the Lo. Burleigh, Lo. high Threasurer of England.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>To you, right noble Lord, whose carefull brest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To menage of most grave affaires is bent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on whose mightie shoulders most doth rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The burdein of this kingdomes governement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the wide compasse of the firmament</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On Atlas mighty shoulders is upstayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unfitly I these ydle rimes present,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The labor of lost time, and wit unstayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet if their deeper sence be inly wayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the dim vele, with which from commune vew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their fairer parts are hid, aside be layd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perhaps not vaine they may appeare to you.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as they be, vouchsafe them to receave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wipe their faults out of your censure grave.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sonnet-3" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Sonnet</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">To the right Honourable the Earle of Oxenford, Lord high Chamberlayne of England etc.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Receive, most Noble Lord, in gentle gree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The unripe fruit of an unready wit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which by thy countenaunce doth crave to bee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Defended from foule Envies poisnous bit.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which so to doe may thee right well besit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith th'antique glory of thine auncestry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under a shady vele is therein writ,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke thine owne long living memory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Succeeding them in true nobility:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And also for the love which thou doest beare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To th' Heliconian ymps, and they to thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They unto thee, and thou to them, most deare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deare as thou art unto thy selfe, so love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That loves and honours thee, as doth behove.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sonnet-4" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Sonnet</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">To the right honourable the Earle of Northumberland.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The sacred Muses have made alwaies clame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be the Nourses of nobility,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Registres of everlasting fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To all that armes professe and chevalry.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, by like right the noble Progeny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which them succeed in fame and worth, are tyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T'embrace the service of sweete Poetry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By whose endevours they are glorifide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke from all, of whom it is envide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To patronize the authour of their praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which gives them life, that els would soone have dide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And crownes their ashes with immortall baies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thee, therefore, right noble Lord, I send</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This present of my paines, it to defend.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sonnet-5" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Sonnet</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">To the right honourable the Earle of Cumberland.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Redoubted Lord, in whose corageous mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The flowre of chevalry, now bloosming faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth promise fruite worthy the noble kind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which of their praises have left you the haire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To you this humble present I prepare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For love of vertue and of Martial praise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which though nobly ye inclined are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As goodlie well ye shew'd in late assaies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet brave ensample of long passed daies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which trew honor yee may fashiond see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To like desire of honor may ye raise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fill your mind with magnanimitee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Receive it, Lord, therefore, as it was ment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For honor of your name and high descent.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sonnet-6" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Sonnet</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">To the most honourable and excellent Lo. the Earle of Essex, Great Maister of the Horse to her Highnesse, and knight of the Noble order of the Garter, etc.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Magnificke Lord, whose vertues excellent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe merit a most famous Poets witt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be thy living praises instrument,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet doe not sdeigne to let thy name be writt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In this base Poeme, for thee far unfitt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nought is thy worth disparaged thereby;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when my Muse, whose fethers, nothing flitt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe yet but flagg, and lowly learne to fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With bolder wing shall dare alofte to sty</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the last praises of this Faery Queene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then shall it make more famous memory</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of thine Heroicke parts, such as they beene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till then, vouchsafe thy noble countenaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To these first labours needed furtheraunce.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sonnet-7" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Sonnet</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">To the right Honourable the Earle of Ormond and Ossory.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Receive, most noble Lord, a simple taste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the wilde fruit which salvage soyl hath bred;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, being through long wars left almost waste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With brutish barbarisme is overspredd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, in so faire a land as may be redd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not one Parnassus, nor one Helicone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Left for sweete Muses to be harboured,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But where thy selfe hast thy brave mansione:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There, in deede, dwel faire Graces many one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gentle Nymphes, delights of learned wits;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in thy person, without paragone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All goodly bountie and true honour sits.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such, therefore, as that wasted soyl doth yield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Receive, dear Lord, in worth, the fruit of barren field.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sonnet-8" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Sonnet</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">To the right honourable the Lord Ch. Howard, Lo. high Admiral of England, knight of the noble order of the Garter, and one of her Majesties privie Counsel, etc.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And ye, brave Lord, whose goodly personage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And noble deeds, each other garnishing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Make you ensample to the present age</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of th'old Heroes, whose famous ofspring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The antique Poets wont so much to sing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In this same Pageaunt have a worthy place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith those huge castles of Castilian King,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That vainly threatned kingdomes to displace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like flying doves ye did before you chace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that proud people, woxen insolent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through many victories, didst first deface:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy praises everlasting monument</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is in this verse engraven semblably,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it may live to all posterity.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sonnet-9" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Sonnet</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">To the right honourable the Lord of Hunsdon, high Chamberlaine to her Majesty.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Renowmed Lord, that, for your worthinesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And noble deeds, have your deserved place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">High in the favour of that Emperesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The worlds sole glory and her sexes grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here eke of right have you a worthie place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both for your nearnes to that Faerie Queene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for your owne high merit in like cace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which, apparaunt proofe was to be scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that tumultuous rage and fearfull deene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Northerne rebels ye did pacify,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And their disloiall powre defaced clene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The record of enduring memory.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Live, Lord, for ever in this lasting verse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all posteritie thy honor may reherse.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sonnet-10" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Sonnet</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">To the most renowned and valiant Lord, the Lord Grey of Wilton, knight of the Noble order of the Garter, etc.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Most Noble Lord, the pillor of my life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Patrone of my Muses pupillage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through whose large bountie, poured on me rife</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the first season of my feeble age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I now doe live, bound yours by vassalage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith nothing ever may redeeme, nor reave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of your endlesse debt, so sure a gage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vouchsafe in worth this small guift to receave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which in your noble hands for pledge I leave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the rest that I am tyde t'account:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rude rymes, the which a rustick Muse did weave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In savadge soyle, far from Parnasso Mount,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And roughly wrought in an unlearned Loome:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which vouchsafe, dear Lord, your favorable doome.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sonnet-11" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Sonnet</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">To the right honourable the Lord of Buckhurst, one of her Majesties privie Counsell.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In vain I thinke, right honourable Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By this rude ryme to memorize thy name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose learned Muse hath writ her owne record</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In golden verse, worthy immortal fame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou much more fit (were leasure to the same)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy gracious Soverains praises to compile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her imperiall Majestic to frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In loftie numbers and heroicke stile.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, sith thou maist not so, give leave a while</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To baser wit his power therein to spend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose grosse defaults thy daintie pen may file,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unadvised oversights amend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But evermore vouchsafe it to maintaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against vile Zoilus backbitings vaine.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sonnet-12" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Sonnet</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">To the right honourable Sir Fr. Walsingham, knight, principal Secretary to her Majesty, and one of her honourable privy Counsell.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>That Mantuane Poets incompared spirit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose girland now is set in highest place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had not Mecaenas, for his worthy merit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It first advaunst to great Augustus grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might long perhaps have lien in silence bace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne bene so much admir'd of later age.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This lowly Muse, that learns like steps to trace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flies for like aide unto your Patronage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That are the great Mecaenas of this age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As wel to al that civil artes professe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As those that are inspir'd with Martial rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And craves protection of her feeblenesse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which if ye yield, perhaps ye may her rayse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In bigger tunes to sound your living prayse.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sonnet-13" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Sonnet</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">To the right noble Lord and most valiaunt Captaine, Sir John Norris, knight, Lord president of Mounster.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Who ever gave more honourable prize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the sweet Muse then did the Martiall crew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That their brave deeds she might immortalise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In her shril tromp, and sound their praises dew?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who then ought more to favour her then you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Moste noble Lord, the honor of this age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Precedent of all that armes ensue?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose warlike prowesse and manly courage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tempred with reason and advizement sage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath fild sad Belgicke with victorious spoile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Fraunce and Ireland left a famous gage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lately shakt the Lusitanian soile.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sith, then, each where thou hast dispredd thy fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love him that hath eternized your name.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sonnet-14" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Sonnet</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">To the right noble and valorous knight, Sir Walter Raleigh, Lo. Wardein of the Stanneryes, and lieftenaunt of Cornewaile.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>To thee, that art the sommers Nightingale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy soveraine Qoddesses most deare delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why doe I send this rusticke Madrigale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That may thy tunefull eare unseason quite?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou onely fit this Argument to write,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In whose high thoughts Pleasure hath built her bowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dainty love learnd sweetly to endite.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My rimes I know unsavory and sowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tast the streames that, like a golden showre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flow from thy fruitfull head, of thy love's praise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fitter, perhaps, to thonder Martiall stowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When so thee list thy lofty Muse to raise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, till that thou thy Poeme wilt make knowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let thy faire Cinthias praises be thus rudely showne.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sonnet-15" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Sonnet</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">To the right honourable and most vertuous Lady the Countesse of Penbroke.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Remembraunce of that most Heroicke spirit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hevens pride, the glory of our daies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which now triumpheth, through immortall merit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his brave vertues, crown'd with lasting baies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of hevenlie blis and everlasting praies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who first my Muse did lift out of the flore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sing his sweet delights in lowlie laies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bids me, most noble Lady, to adore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His goodly image, living evermore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the divine resemblaunce of your face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with your vertues ye embellish more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And native beauty deck with heavenlie grace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For his, and for your owne especial sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vouchsafe from him this toke in good worth to take.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sonnet-16" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Sonnet</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">To the most vertuous and beautifull Lady, the Lady Carew.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Ne may I, without blot of endlesse blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You, fairest Lady, leave out of this place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with remembraunce of your gracious name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith that courtly garlond most ye grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And deck the world, adorne these verses base.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not that these few lines can in them comprise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those glorious ornaments of hevenly grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith ye triumph over feeble eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in subdued harts do tyranyse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thereunto doth need a golden quill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And silver leaves, them rightly to devise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to make humble present of good will:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, whenas timely meanes it purchase may,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In ampler wise it selfe will forth display.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sonnet-17" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Sonnet</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">To all the gratious and beautifull Ladies in the Court.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The Chian Peinter, when he was requirde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To pourtraift Venus in her perfect hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make his worke more absolute, desird</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the fairest Maides to have the vew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Much more me needs, to draw the semblant trew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of beauties Queene, the worlds sole wonderment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sharpe my sence with sundry beauties vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And steale from each some part of ornament.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If all the world to seeke I overwent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A fairer crew yet no where could I see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then that brave court doth to mine eie present;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the worlds pride seemes gathered there to bee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of each a part I stole by cunning thefte:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgive it me, faire Dames, sith lesse ye have not lefte.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
		<section id="preface" epub:type="preface">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">A Letter to Sir Walter Raleigh</h2>
				<p><b>A Letter of the Authors</b>,</p>
				<p>Expounding his whole intention in the course of this worke; which, for that it giveth great light to the reader, for the better understanding is hereunto annexed.</p>
				<p>To the Right Noble and Valorous</p>
				<p><b>Sir Walter Raleigh</b>, Knight,</p>
				<p>Lord Wardein of the Stanneryes, and her Majesties Lieutenaunt of the county of Cornewayll.</p>
			</header>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>Sir, knowing how doubtfully all Allegories may be constructed, and this booke of mine, which I have entituled The Faery Queene, being a continued Allegorie, or darke conceit, I have thought good, as well for avoyding of jealous opinions and misconstructions, as also for your better light in reading thereof, (being so, by you commanded) to discover unto you the generall intention and meaning, which in the whole course thereof I have fashioned, without expressing of any particular purposes, or by-accidents therein occasioned. The generall end therefore of all the booke, is to fashion a gentleman or noble person in vertuous and gentle discipline. Which for that I conceived shoulde be most plausible and pleasing, beeing coloured with an historicall fiction, the which the most part of men delight to read, rather for varietie of matter than for profit of the ensample: I chose the historie of king Arthure, as most fit for the excellencie of his person, beeing made famous by many mens former workes, and also furthest from the danger of envie, and suspicion of present time. In which I have followed all the antique poets historicall: first Homer, who in the persons of Agamemnon and Ulysses hath ensampled a good governour and a vertuous man, the one in his Ilias, the other in his Odysseis: then Virgil, whose like intention was to doe in the person of Æneas: after him Ariosto comprised them both in his Orlando: and lately Tasso dissevered them againe, and formed both parts in two persons, namely, that part which they in philosophy call Ethice, or vertues of a private man, coloured in his Rinaldo: the other named Politice, in his Godfredo. By ensample of which excellent Poets, I laboure to pourtraict in Arthure, before he was king, the image of a brave knight, perfected in the twelve private morall vertues, as Aristotle hath devised: which if I find to be well accepted, I may be perhaps encoraged to frame the other part of pollitike vertues in his person, after he came to bee king.</p>
				<p>To some I know this Methode will seem displeasant, which had rather have good discipline delivered plainly in way of precepts, or sermoned at large, as they use, then thus clowdily enwrapped in Allegoricall devises. But such, mee seeme, should be satisfied with the use of these dayes, seeing all things accounted by their showes, and nothing esteemed of, that is not delightfull and pleasing to common sense. For this cause is Xenophon preferred before Plato, for that the one, in the exquisite depth of his judgement, formed a Commune-wealth, such as it should be; but the other, in the person of Cyrus and the Persians, fashioned a government, such as might best be: So much more profitable and gracious is doctrine by ensample then by rule. So have I laboured to do in the person of Arthure: whom I conceive, after his long education by Timon (to whom he was by Merlin delivered to be brought up, so soone as he was borne of the Lady Igrayne) to have seen in a dreame or vision the Faerie Queene, with whose excellent beautie ravished, hee awaking, resolved to seek her out: and so, being by Merlin armed, and by Timon throughly instructed, he went to seeke her forth in Faery land. In that Faery Queene I mean Glory in my generall intention: but in my particular I conceive the most excellent and glorious person of our soveraine the Queene, and her kingdome in Faery land. And yet, in some places else, I doe otherwise shadow her. For considering shee beareth two persons, the one of a most royall Queene or Empresse, the other of a most vertuous and beautifull lady, this latter part in some places I doe expresse in Belphoebe, fashioning her name according to your owne excellent conceipt of Cynthia,2 (Phoebe and Cynthia being both names of Diana). So in the person of Prince Arthure I sette forth magnificence in particular, which vertue, for that (according to Aristotle and the rest) it is the perfection of all the rest, and containeth in it them all, therefore in the whole course I mention the deeds of Arthure appliable to the vertue, which I write of in that booke. But of the twelve other vertues I make XII other knights the patrons, for the more varietie of the historic: Of which these three bookes containe three.</p>
				<p>The first, of the Knight of the Red crosse, in whom I expresse Holinesse: the second of Sir Guyon, in whome I set foorth Temperance: the third of Britomartis, a Lady knight, in whom I picture Chastitie. But because the beginning of the whole worke seemeth abrupt and as depending upon other antecedents, it needs that yee know the occasion of these three knights severall adventures. For the Methode of a Poet historicall is not such as of an Historiographer. For an Historiographer discourseth of affaires orderly as they were done, accounting as well the times as the actions; but a Poet thrusteth into the middest, even where it most concerneth him, and there recoursing to the things forepast, and divining of things to come, maketh a pleasing analysis of all.</p>
				<p>The beginning therefore of my historie, if it were to be told by an Historiographer, should be the twelfth booke, which is the last; where I devise that the Faery Queene kept her annuall feast twelve daies; uppon which twelve severall dayes, the occasions of the twelve severall adventures hapned, which being undertaken by XII severall knights, are in these twelve books severally handled and discoursed. The first was this. In the beginning of the feast, there presented him selfe a tall clownish younge man, who falling before the Queene of Faeries desired a boone (as the manner then was) which during that feast she might not refuse: which was that hee might have the atchievement of any adventure, which during that feast should happen; that being granted, he rested him selfe on the fioore, unfit through his rusticitie for a better place. Soone after entred a faire Ladie in mourning weedes, riding on a white Asse, with a dwarfe behind her leading a warlike steed, that bore the Armes of a knight, and his speare in the dwarfes hand. She falling before the Queene of Faeries, complayned that her father and mother, an ancient King and Queene, had bene by an huge dragon many yeers shut up in a brazen Castle, who thence suffered them not to issew: and therefore besought the Faery Queene to assigne her some one of her knights to take on him that exployt. Presently that clownish person upstarting, desired that adventure; whereat the Queene much wondering, and the Lady much gaine-saying, yet he earnestly importuned his desire. In the end the Lady told him, that unlesse that armour which she brought would serve him (that is, the armour of a Christian man specified by Saint Paul, V. Ephes.) that he could not succeed in that enterprise: which being forth with put upon him with due furnitures thereunto, he seemed the goodliest man in al that company, and was well liked of the Lady. And eftesoones taking on him knighthood, and mounting on that straunge Courser, he went forth with her on that adventure: where beginneth the first booke, viz.</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>A gentle knight was pricking on the playne, etc.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>The second day there came in a Palmer bearing an Infant with bloody hands, whose Parents he complained to have bene slaine by an enchauntresse called Acrasia: and therefore craved of the Faery Queene, to appoint him some knight to performe that adventure, which being assigned to Sir Guyon, he presently went foorth with the same Palmer: which is the beginning of the second booke and the whole subject thereof. The third day there came in a Groome, who complained before the Faery Queene, that a vile Enchaunter, called Busirane, had in hand a most faire Lady, called Amoretta, whom he kept in most grevious torment. Whereupon Sir Scudamour, the lover of that Lady, presently tooke on him that adventure. But beeing unable to performe it by reason of the hard Enchauntments, after long sorrow, in the end met with Britomartis, who succoured him, and reskewed his love.</p>
				<p>But by occasion hereof, many other adventures are intermedled; but rather as accidents then intendments. As the love of Britomart, the overthrow of Marinell, the miserie of Florimell, the vertuousness of Belphoebe; and many the like.</p>
				<p>Thus much, Sir, I have briefly-over-run to direct your understanding to the wel-head of the History, that from thence gathering the whole intention of the conceit, ye may as in a handfull gripe all the discourse, which otherwise may happely seem tedious and confused. So humbly craving the continuance of your honourable favour towards me, and th' eternall establishment of your happines, I humbly take leave.</p>
				<footer>
					<p>23 January, 1589,</p>
					<p>Yours most humbly affectionate,</p>
					<p>Ed. Spenser.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
		<section id="book-1" epub:type="part z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Containing the Legend of the Knight of the Red Cross, or of Holiness</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="book-1-prologue" epub:type="prologue">
				<p>
					<span>Me, all too meane, the sacred Muse areeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To blazon broade emongst her learned throng:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fierce warres and faithful loves shall moralize my song.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O! I, the man whose Muse whylome did maske,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As time her taught, in lowly Shephards weeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Am now enforst, a farre unfitter taske,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For trumpets sterne to chaunge mine Oaten reeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sing of Knights and Ladies gentle deeds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose praises having slept in silence long,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Helpe then, O holy Virgin! chiefe of nyne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy weaker Novice to performe thy will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lay forth out of thine everlasting scryne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The antique rolles, which there lye hidden still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Faerie knights, and fayrest Tanaquill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom that most noble Briton Prince so long</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sought through the world, and suffered so much ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I must rue his undeserved wrong:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, helpe thou my weake wit, and sharpen my dull tong!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And thou, most dreaded impe of highest Jove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Venus sonne, that with thy cruell dart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At that good knight so cunningly didst rove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That glorious fire it kindled in his hart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lay now thy deadly Heben bowe apart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with thy mother mylde come to myne ayde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Come, both; and with you bring triumphant Mart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In loves and gentle jollities arraid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After his murdrous spoyles and bloudie rage allayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And with them eke, O Goddesse heavenly bright!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mirrour of grace and Majestic divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great Ladie of the greatest Isle, whose light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like Phoebus lampe throughout the world doth shine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shed thy faire beames into my feeble eyne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And raise my thoughtes, too humble and too vile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To thinke of that true glorious type of thine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The argument of mine afflidted stile:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which to heare vouchsafe, O dearest dread, a-while!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The Patron of true Holinesse</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Foule Errour doth defeate;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hypocrisie, him to entrappe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Doth to his home entreat.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A gentle knight was pricking on the plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ycladd in mightie armes and silver shielde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein old dints of deepe woundes did remaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cruell markes of many a bloodie fielde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet armes till that time did he never wield.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His angry steede did chide his foming bitt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As much disdayning to the curbe to yield.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full jolly knight he seemd, and faire did sitt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As one for knightly giusts and fierce encounters fitt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And on his brest a bloodie Crosse he bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The deare remembrance of his dying Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For whose sweete sake that glorious badge he wore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dead, as living, ever him ador'd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his shield the like was also scor'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For soveraine hope which in his helpe he had.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right faithfull true he was in deede and word;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But of his cheere did seeme too solemne sad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet nothing did he dread, but ever was ydrad.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Upon a great adventure he was bond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That greatest Gloriana to him gave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(That greatest Glorious Queene of Faery lond)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To winne him worshippe, and her grace to have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which of all earthly thinges he most did crave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever as he rode his hart did earne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To prove his puissance in battell brave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his foe, and his new force to learne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his foe, a Dragon horrible and stearne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A lovely Lady rode him faire beside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a lowly Asse more white than snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet she much whiter; but the same did hide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under a vele, that wimpled was full low;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And over all a blacke stole she did throw:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one that inly mournd, so was she sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heavie sate upon her palfry slow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seemed in heart some hidden care she had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by her, in her line, a milkewhite lambe she lad.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So pure and innocent, as that same lambe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She was in life, and every vertuous lore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by descent from Royall lynage came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of ancient Kings and Queenes, that had of yore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their scepters stretcht from East to Westerne shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the world in their subjection held;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that infernall feehd with foule uprore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forwasted all their land, and them expeld;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom to avenge she had this Knight from far compeld.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Behind her farre away a Dwarfe did lag,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That lasie seemd, in being ever last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or wearied with bearing of her bag</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of needments at his backe. Thus as they past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The day with cloudes was suddeine overcast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And angry Jove an hideous storme of raine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did poure into his Lemans lap so fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That everie wight to shrowd it did constrain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this faire couple eke to shroud themselves were fain.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Enforst to seeke some covert nigh at hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A shadie grove not farr away they spide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That promist ayde the tempest to withstand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose loftie trees, yclad with sommers pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did spred so broad, that heavens light did hide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not perceable with power of any starr:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all within were pathes and alleies wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With footing worne, and leading inward farr.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faire harbour that them seems; so in they entred ar.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And foorth they passe, with pleasure forward led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Joying to heare the birdes sweete harmony,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, therein shrouded from the tempest dred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seemd in their song to scorne the cruell sky.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much can they praise the trees so straight and hy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sayling Pine; the Cedar proud and tall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The vine-propp Elme; the Poplar never dry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The builder Oake, sole king of forrests all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Alpine good for staves; the Cypresse funerall;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Laurell, mede of mightie Conquerours</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Poets sage; the Firre that weepeth still;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Willow, worne of forlorne Paramours;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Eugh, obedient to the benders will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Birch for shaftes; the Sallow for the mill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Mirrhe sweete-bleeding in the bitter wound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The warlike Beech; the Ash for nothing ill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fruitful Olive; and the Platane round;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The carver Holme; the Maple seeldom inward sound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Led with delight, they thus beguile the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until the blustring storme is overblowne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When, weening to returne whence they did stray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They cannot finde that path, which first was showne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wander too and fro in waies unknowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Furthest from end then, when they neerest weene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That makes them doubt their wits be not their owne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So many pathes, so many turnings scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That which of them to take in diverse doubt they been.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last resolving forward still to fare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that some end they finde, or in or out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That path they take that beaten seemd most bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And like to lead the labyrinth about;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when by tradt they hunted had throughout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At length it brought them to a hollowe cave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amid the thickest woods. The Champion stout</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones dismounted from his courser brave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the Dwarfe awhile his needlesse spere he gave.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Be well aware," quoth then that Ladie milde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Least suddaine mischiefe ye too rash provoke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The danger hid, the place unknowne and wilde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Breedes dreadful doubts. Oft fire is without smoke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And perill without show: therefore your stroke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir Knight, with-hold, till further tryall made."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ah Ladie," (sayd he) "shame were to revoke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The forward footing for an hidden shade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vertue gives herself light through darknesse for to wade."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Yea but" (quoth she) "the perill of this place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I better wot than you: though nowe too late</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wish you backe returne with foule disgrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet wisedome warnes, whilest foot is in the gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To stay the steppe, ere forced to retrate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This is the wandring wood, this <i>Errours</i> den,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A monster vile, whom God and man does hate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore I read beware." "Fly, Fly!" (quoth then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fearefull Dwarfe) "this is no place for living men."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, full of fire and greedy hardiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The youthfull Knight could not for ought be staide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But forth unto the darksom hole he went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And looked in: his glistring armor made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A little glooming light, much like a shade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which he saw the ugly monster plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Halfe like a serpent horribly displaide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But th'other halfe did womans shape retaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most lothsom, filthie, foule, and full of vile disdaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, as she lay upon the durtie ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her huge long taile her den all overspred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was in knots and many boughtes upwound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pointed with mortall sting. Of her there bred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A thousand yong ones, which she dayly fed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sucking upon her poisnous dugs; each one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of sundrie shape, yet all ill-favored:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone as that uncouth light upon them shone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into her mouth they crept, and suddain all were gone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Their dam upstart out of her den affraide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rushed forth, hurling her hideous taile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About her cursed head; whose folds displaid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were stretcht now forth at length without entraile.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She lookt about, and seeing one in mayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Armed to point, sought backe to turne againe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For light she hated as the deadly bale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ay wont in desert darkness to remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where plain none might her see, nor she see any plaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when the valiant Elfe perceiv'd, he lept</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Lyon fierce upon the flying pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his trenchand blade her boldly kept</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From turning backe, and forced her to stay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith enrag'd she loudly gan to bray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And turning fierce her speckled taile advaunst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Threatning her angrie sting, him to dismay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, nought aghast, his mightie hand enhaunst:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stroke down from her head unto her shoulder glaunst.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Much daunted with that dint her fence was dazd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet kindling rage her selfe she gathered round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all attonce her beastly bodie raizd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With doubled forces high above the ground:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, wrapping up her wrethed sterne arownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lept fierce upon his shield, and her huge traine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All suddenly about his body wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hand or foot to stirr he strove in vaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God helpe the man so wrapt in Errours endlesse traine!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His Lady, sad to see his sore constraint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cried out, "Now, now, Sir knight, shew what ye bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Add faith unto your force, and be not faint;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strangle her, els she sure will strangle thee."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That when he heard, in great perplexitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His gall did grate for griefe and high disdaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, knitting all his force, got one hand free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith he grypt her gorge with so great paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That soon to loose her wicked bands did her constraine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith she spewd out of her filthie maw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A floud of poyson horrible and blacke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of great lumps of flesh and gobbets raw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which stunck so vildly, that it forst him slacke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His grasping hold, and from her turne him backe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her vomit full of bookes and papers was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With loathly frogs and toades, which eyes did lacke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And creeping sought way in the weedy gras:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her filthie parbreake all the place defiled has.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when old father Nilus gins to swell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With timely pride above the Aegyptian vale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His fattie waves doe fertile slime putwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And overflow each plaine and lowly dale:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when his later spring gins to avale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Huge heapes of mudd he leaves, wherin there breed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ten thousand kindes of creatures, partly male</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And partly female, of his fruitful seed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such ugly monstrous shapes elswher may no man reed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The same so sore annoyed has the knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, welnigh choked with the deadly stinke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His forces faile, ne can no lenger fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose corage when the feend perceivd to shrinke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She poured forth out of her hellish sinke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her fruitfull cursed spawne of serpents small,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deformed monsters, fowle, and blacke as inke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which swarming all about his legs did crall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And him encombred sore, but could not hurt at all.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As gentle shepheard in sweete eventide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When ruddy Phebus gins to welke in west,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">High on an hill, his flocke to vewen wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Markes which doe byte their hasty supper best;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A cloud of cumbrous gnattes doe him molest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All striving to infixe their feeble stinges,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from their noyance he no where can rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with his clownish hands their tender wings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He trusheth oft, and oft doth mar their murmurings.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus ill bestedd, and fearfull more of shame .</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then of the certeine perill he stood in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Halfe furious unto his foe he came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Resolvd in minde all suddenly to win,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or soone to lose, before he once would lin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stroke at her with more than manly force,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from her body, full of filthie sin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He raft her hatefull heade without remorse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A streame of cole-black blood forth gushed from her corse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her scattred brood, soone as their Parent deare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They saw so rudely falling to the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Groning full deadly, all with troublous feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gathred themselves about her body round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weening their wonted entrance to have found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At her wide mouth: but being there withstood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They flocked all about her bleeding wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sucked up their dying mother's blood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Making her death their life, and eke her hurt their good .</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That detestable sight him much amazde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see th'unkindly Impes, of heaven accurst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Devoure their dam; on whom while so he gazd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having all satisfide their bloudy thurst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their bellies swolne he saw with fulnesse burst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bowels gushing forth: well worthy end</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of such as drunke her life the which them nurst!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now needeth him no lenger labour spend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His foes have slaine themselves, with whom he should contend.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His Lady, seeing all that chaunst from farre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Approcht in hast to greet his viclorie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saide, "Faire knight, borne under happie starre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who see your vanquisht foes before you lye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well worthie be you of that Armory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein ye have great glory wonne this day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And proov'd your strength on a strong enimie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your first adventure: many such I pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And henceforth ever wish that like succeed it may!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then mounted he upon his Steede again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with the Lady backward sought to wend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That path he kept which beaten was most plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever would to any byway bend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But still did follow one unto the end;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which at last out of the wood them brought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So forward on his way (with God to frend)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He passed forth, and new adventure sought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long way he traveiled before he heard of ought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At length they chaunst to meet upon the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An aged Sire, in long blacke weedes yclad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His feete all bare, his beard all hoarie gray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by his belt his booke he hanging had:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sober he seemde, and very sagely sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the ground his eyes were lowly bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Simple in shew, and voide of malice bad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the way he prayed as he went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And often knockt his brest, as one that did repent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He faire the knight saluted, looting low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who faire him quited, as that courteous was;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after asked him, if he did know</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of straunge adventures, which abroad did pas?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ah! my dear sonne," (quoth he) "how should, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Silly old man, that lives in hidden cell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bidding his beades all day for his trespas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ty dings of warre and worldly trouble tell?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With holy father fits not with such thinges to mell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But if of daunger, which hereby doth dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And homebredd evil ye desire to heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of a straunge man I can you tidings tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That wasteth all this countrie, farre and neare."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Of such," (saide he) "I chiefly doe inquere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shall thee well rewarde to shew the place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which that wicked wight his dayes doth weare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For to all knighthood it is foule disgrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That such a cursed creature lives so long a space."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Far hence" (quoth he) "in wastfull wildernesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His dwelling is, by which no living wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May ever passe, but thorough great distresse."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Now," (said the Ladie,) "draweth toward night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And well I wote, that of your later fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye all forwearied be; for what so strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, wanting rest, will also want of might?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Sunne, that measures heaven all day long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At night doth baite his steedes the Ocean waves emong.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Then with the Sunne take, Sir, your timely rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with new day new worke at once begin:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untroubled night, they say, gives counsell best."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Right well, Sir knight, ye have advised bin/'</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quoth then that aged man: "the way to win</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is wisely to advise; now day is spent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore with me ye may take up your In</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For this same night." The knight was well content;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So with that godly father to his home they went.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A litle lowly Hermitage it was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Downe in a dale, hard by a forests side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far from resort of people that did pas</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In traveill to and froe: a little wyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There was an holy chappell edifyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein the Hermite dewly wont to say</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His holy thinges each morne and eventyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereby a christall streame did gently play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which from a sacred fountaine welled forth alway.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Arrived there, the litle house they fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne looke for entertainement where none was;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rest is their feast, and all things at their will:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The noblest mind the best contentment has.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With faire discourse the evening so they pas;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that olde man of pleasing wordes had store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And well could file his tongue as smooth as glas</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He told of Saintes and Popes, and evermore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He strowd an <i>Ave-Mary</i> after and before.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The drouping night thus creepeth on them fast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the sad humor loading their eyeliddes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As messenger of Morpheus, on them cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sweet slombring deaw, the which to sleep them biddes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto their lodgings then his guestes he riddes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where when all drownd in deadly sleepe he findes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He to his studie goes; and there amiddes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His magick bookes, and artes of sundrie kindes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He seekes out mighty charmes to trouble sleepy minds.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then choosing out few words most horrible,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Let none them read) thereof did verses frame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which, and other spelles like terrible,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He bade awake blacke Plutoes griesly Dame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cursed heven; and spake reprochful shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of highest God, the Lord of life and light:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A bold bad man, that dar'd to call by name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great Gorgon, prince of darknes and dead night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At which Cocytus quakes, and Styx is put to flight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And forth he cald out of deepe darkness dredd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Legions of Sprights, the which, like little flye's</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fluttring about his ever-damned hedd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Awaite whereto their service he applyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To aide his friendes, or fray his enimies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of those he chose out two, the falsest twoo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fittest for to forge true-seeming lyes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The one of them he gave a message too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The other by him selfe staide, other worke to doo.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He, making speedy way through spersed ayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through the world of waters wide and deepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Morpheus house doth hastily repaire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amid the bowels of the earth full steepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And low, where dawning day doth never peepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His dwelling is; there Tethys his wet bed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth ever wash, and Cynthia still doth steepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In silver deaw his ever-drouping hed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whiles sad Night over him her mantle black doth spred.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whose double gates he findeth locked fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The one faire fram'd of burnisht Yvory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other all with silver overcast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wakeful dogges before them farr doe lye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Watching to banish Care their enimy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who oft is wont to trouble gentle Sleepe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By them the Sprite doth passe in quietly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto Morpheus comes, whom drowned deepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In drowsie fit he findes: of nothing he takes keepe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And more to lulle him in his slumber soft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A trickling streame from high rock tumbling downe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever-drizling raine upon the loft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mixt with a murmuring winde, much like the sowne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of swarming Bees, did cast him in a swowne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No other noyse, nor peoples troublous cryes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As still are wont t'annoy the walled towne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might there be heard; but carelesse Quiet lyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wrapt in eternall silence farre from enimyes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Messenger approaching to him spake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But his waste wordes retournd to him in vaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So sound he slept, that nought mought him awake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then rudely he him thrust, and pusht with paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat he gan to stretch; but he againe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shooke him so hard, that forced him to speake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one then in a dreame, whose dryer braine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is tost with troubled sights and fancies weake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He mumbled soft, but would not all his silence breake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Sprite then gan more boldly him to wake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And threatned unto him the dreaded name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Hecate: whereat he gan to quake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, lifting up his lompish head, with blame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Halfe angrie asked him, for what he came.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Hether" (quoth he,) "me Archimago sent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He that the stubborne Sprites can wisely tame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He bids thee to him send for his intent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fit false dreame, that can delude the sleepers sent."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The God obayde; and, calling forth straight way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A diverse Dreame out of his prison darke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Delivered it to him, and downe did lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His heavie head, devoide of careful carke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose sences all were straight benumbd and starke.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He, backe returning by the Yvorie dore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Remounted up as light as chearefull Larke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on his litle winges the dreame he bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In haste unto his Lord, where he him left afore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who all this while, with charmes and hidden artes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had made a Lady of that other Spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fram'd of liquid ayre her tender partes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So lively and so like in all mens sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That weaker sence it could have ravisht quight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The maker-selfe, for all his wondrous witt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was nigh beguiled with so goodly sight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her all in white he clad, and over it</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cast a black stole, most like to seeme for Una fit.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now, when that ydle dream was to him brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto that Elfin knight he bad him fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where he slept soundly void of evil thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with false shewes abuse his fantasy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In sort as he him schooled privily:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that new creature, borne without her dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of the makers guile, with usage sly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He taught to imitate that Lady trew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose semblance she did carrie under feigned hew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus, well instructed, to their worke they haste;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, comming where the knight in slomber lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The one upon his hardie head him plaste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made him dream of loves and lustfull play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nigh his manly hart did melt away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bathed in wanton blis and wicked joy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then seemed him his Lady by him lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to him playnd, how that false winged boy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her chaste hart had subdewd to learne Dame Pleasures toy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And she her selfe, of beautie soveraigne Queene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayre Venus, seemde unto his bed to bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her, whom he, waking, evermore did weene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bee the chastest flowre that aye did spring</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On earthly braunch; the daughter of a king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now a loose Leman to vile service bound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the Graces seemed all to sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><i>Hymen Iö Hymen!</i> dauncing all around;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whylst freshest Flora her with Yvie girlond crownd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In this great passion of unwonted lust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or wonted feare of doing ought amis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He starteth up, as seeming to mistrust</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some secret ill, or hidden foe of his.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lo! there before his face his Ladie is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under blacke stole hyding her bayted hooke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as halfe blushing offred him to kiss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With gentle blandishment and lovely look,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most like that Virgin true which for her Knight him took.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All cleane dismayd to see so uncouth sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And halfe enraged at her shamelesse guise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He thought have slaine her in his fierce despight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But hastie heat tempring with sufferance wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He stayde his hand; and gan himselfe advise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To prove his sense, and tempt her faigned truth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wringing her hands, in wemens pitteous wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho can she weepe, to stirre up gentle ruth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both for her noble blood, and for her tender youth.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And sayd, "Ah Sir, my liege Lord, and my love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall I accuse the hidden cruell fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mightie causes wrought in heaven above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or the blind God that doth me thus amate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For hoped love to winne me certaine hate?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet thus perforce he bids me do, or die.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Die is my dew; yet rew my wretched state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You, whom my hard avenging destinie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath made judge of my life or death indifferently.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Your owne deare sake forst me at first to leave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My father's kingdom" There she stopt with teares;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her swollen hart her speech seemd to bereave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then again begonne; "My weaker yeares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Captiv'd to fortune and frayle worldly feares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fly to your fayth for succour and sure ayde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let me not die in languor and long teares."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Why, Dame," (quoth he), "what hath ye thus dismayd?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What frayes ye, that were wont to comfort me affrayd?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Love of your selfe," she saide, "and deare constraint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lets me not sleepe, but waste the wearie night</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In secret anguish and unpittied plaint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles you in carelesse sleepe are drowned quight."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her doubtfull words made that redoubted knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Suspect her truth; yet since no' untruth he knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her fawning love with foule disdainefull spight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He would not shend; but said, "Deare dame, I rew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That for my sake unknowne such griefe unto you grew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Assure your selfe, it fell not all to ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all so dear as life is to my hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I deeme your love, and hold me to you bound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne let vaine feares procure your needlesse smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where cause is none; but to your rest depart."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not all content, yet seemd she to appease</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her mournefull plaintes, beguiled of her art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fed with words that could not chose but please</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, slyding softly forth, she turnd as to her ease.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Long after lay he musing at her mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much griev'd to thinke that gentle Dame so light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For whose defence he was to shed his blood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last, dull wearines of former fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having yrockt asleepe his irkesome spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That troublous dreame gan freshly tosse his braine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With bowres, and beds, and ladies deare delight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when he saw his labour all was vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With that misformed spright he back returnd againe.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The guilefull great Enchaunter parts</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The Redcross Knight from Truth:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into whose stead faire Falsehood steps</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And workes him woefull ruth.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>By this the Northerne wagoner had set</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His sevenfold teme behind the stedfast starre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was in Ocean waves yet never wet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But firme is fixt, and sendeth light from farre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To al that in the wide deepe wandring arre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chearefull Chaunticlere with his note shrill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had warned once, that Phoebus fiery carre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hast was climbing up the Easterne hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full envious that night so long his roome did fill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When those accursed messengers of hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That feigning dreame, and that faire-forged Spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came to their wicked maister, and gan tel</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their bootelesse paines, and ill succeeding night:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, all in rage to see his skilfull might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deluded so, gan threaten hellish paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sad Proserpines wrath, them to affright;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when he saw his threatning was but vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He cast about, and searcht his baleful bokes againe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones he tooke that miscreated faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that same other Spright, on whom he spred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A seeming body of the subtle aire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like a young Squire, in loves and lusty hed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His wanton daies that ever loosely led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without regard of armes and dreaded fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those twoo he tooke, and in a secrete bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Covered with darkenes and misdeeming night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Them both together laid to joy in vaine delight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Forthwith he runnes with feigned faithfull hast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto his guest, who, after troublous sights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dreames, gan now to take more sound repast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom suddenly he wakes with fearful frights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one aghast with feends or damned sprights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to him cals; "Rise, rise! unhappy Swaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That here wex old in sleepe, whiles wicked wights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have knit themselves in Venus shameful chaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come, see where your false Lady doth her honor staine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All in amaze he suddenly up start</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sword in hand, and with the old man went;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who soone him brought into a secret part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where that false couple were full closely ment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In wanton lust and lewd embracement:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when he saw, he burnt with gealous fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The eie of reason was with rage yblent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And would have slaine them in his furious ire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But hardly was restreined of that aged sire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Retourning to his bed in torment great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bitter anguish of his guilty sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He could not rest; but did his stout heart eat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wast his inward gall with deepe despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yrkesome of life, and too long lingring night.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last faire Hesperus in highest skie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had spent his lampe, and brought forth dawning light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then up he rose, and clad him hastily:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dwarfe him brought his steed; so both away do fly.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now when the rosy fingred Morning faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weary of aged Tithones saffron bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had spred her purple robe through deawy aire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the high hils Titan discovered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The royall virgin shooke off drousy hed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, rising forth out of her baser bowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lookt for her knight, who far away was fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for her dwarfe, that wont to waite each howre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then gan she wail and weepe to see that woeful stowre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And after him she rode, with so much speede</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As her slowe beast could make; but all in vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For him so far had borne his light-foot steede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pricked with wrath and fiery fierce disdaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That him to follow was but fruitlesse paine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet she her weary limbes would never rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But every hil and dale, each wood and plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did search, sore grieved in her gentle brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He so ungently left her, whom she loved best.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But subtill Archimago, when his guests</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He saw divided into double parts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Una wandring in woods and forrests,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th'end of his drift, he praisd his divelish arts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That had such might over true meaning harts:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet rests not so, but other meanes doth make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How he may worke unto her further smarts;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For her he hated as the hissing snake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in her many troubles did most pleasure take.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He then devisde himselfe how to disguise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For by his mighty science he could take</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As many formes and shapes in seeming wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As ever Proteus to himselfe could make:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometime a fowle, sometime a fish in lake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now like a foxe, now like a dragon fell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of himselfe he ofte for feare would quake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oft would flie away. O! who can tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hidden powre of herbes, and might of Magick spell?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But now seemde best the person to put on</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that good knight, his late beguiled guest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In mighty armes he was yclad anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And silver shield; upon his coward brest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A bloody crosse, and on his craven crest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A bounch of heares discolourd diversly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full jolly knight he seemde, and wel addrest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when he sate uppon his courser free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saint George himselfe ye would have deemed him to be.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But he, the knight whose semblaunt he did beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The true Saint George, was wandred far away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still flying from his thoughts and gealous feare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will was his guide, and griefe led him astray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last him chaunst to meete upon the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A faithlesse Sarazin, all armde to point,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In whose great shield was writ with letters gay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><i>Sans foy</i>; full large of limbe and every joint</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was, and cared not for God or man a point.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hee had a faire companion of his way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A goodly Lady clad in scarlot red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Purfled with gold and pearle of rich assay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And like a Persian mitre on her hed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee wore, with crowns and owches garnished,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which her lavish lovers to her gave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her wanton palfrey all was overspred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With tinsell trappings, woven like a wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose bridle rung with golden bels and bosses brave.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With faire disport, and courting dalliaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She intertainde her lover all the way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when she saw the knight his speare advaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She soon left of her mirth and wanton play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bad her knight addresse him to the fray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His foe was nigh at hand. He, prickte with pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hope to winne his Ladies hearte that day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth spurred fast: adowne his coursers side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The red bloud trickling staind the way, as he did ride,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The knight of the Red Crosse, when him he spide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spurring so hote with rage dispiteous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan fairly couch his speare, and towards ride.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone meete they both, both fell and furious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, daunted with theyr forces hideous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their steeds doe stagger, and amazed stand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke themselves, too rudely rigorous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Astonied with the stroke of their owne hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doe backe rebutte, and ech to other yealdeth land.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when two rams, stird with ambitious pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fight for the rule of the rich fleeced flocke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their horned fronts so fierce on either side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe meete, that, with the terror of the shocke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Astonied, both stand sencelesse as a blocke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forgetfull of the hanging victory:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So stood these twaine, unmoved as a rocke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both staring fierce, and holding idely</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The broken reliques of their former cruelty.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Sarazin, sore daunted with the buffe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Snatcheth his sword, and fiercely to him flies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who well it wards, and quyteth cuff with cuff:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each others equall puissance envies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through their iron sides with cruell spies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Does seeke to perce; repining courage yields</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No foote to foe: the flashing fier flies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As from a forge, out of their burning shields;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And streams of purple blood new die the verdant fields.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Curse on that Crosse," (quoth then the Sarazin,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"That keepes thy body from the bitter fitt!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dead long ygoe, I wote, thou haddest bin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had not thy charme from thee forwarned itt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yet I warne thee now assured sitt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hide thy head." Therewith upon his crest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With rigor so outrageous he smitt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That a large share it hewd out of the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And glauncing downe his shield from blame him fairly blest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who, thereat wondrous wroth, the sleeping spark</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of native vertue gan eftsoones revive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at his haughty helmet making mark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So hugely stroke, that it the steele did rive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cleft his head. He, tumbling downe alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With bloudy mouth his mother earth did kis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Greeting his grave: his grudging ghost did strive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the fraile flesh; at last it flitted is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether the soules doe fly of men that live amis.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Lady, when she saw her champion fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like the old ruines of a broken towre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Staid not to waile his woefull funerall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But from him fled away with all her powre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who after her as hastily gan scowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bidding the dwarfe with him to bring away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Sarazins shield, signe of his conqueroure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her soone he overtooke, and bad to stay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For present cause was none of dread her to dismay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She turning backe, with ruefull countenaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cride, "Mercy, mercy, Sir, vouchsafe to show</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On silly Dame, subject to hard mischaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to your mighty wil!" Her humblesse low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In so ritch weedes, and seeming glorious show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did much em move his stout heroicke heart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said, "Deare dame, your suddein overthrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much rueth me; but now put feare apart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tel both who ye be, and who that tooke your part."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Melting in teares, then gan she thus lament.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"The wretched woman, whom unhappy howre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath now made thrall to your commandement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before that angry heavens lift to lowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fortune false betraide me to thy powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was (O! what now availeth that I was?)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Borne the sole daughter of an Emperour;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He that the wide West under his rule has,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And high hath set his throne where Tiberis doth pas.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"He, in the first flowre of my freshest age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Betrothed me unto the onely haire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of a most mighty king, most rich and sage':</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was never Prince so faithfull and so faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was never Prince so meeke and debonaire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But ere my hoped day of spousall shone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My dearest Lord fell from high honors staire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the hands of his accursed fone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cruelly was slaine; that shall I ever mone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"His blessed body, spoild of lively breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was afterward, I know not how, convaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fro me hid: of whose most innocent death</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When tidings came to mee, unhappy maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O, how great sorrow my sad soule assaid!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then forth I went his woefull course to find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many yeares throughout the world I straid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A virgin widow; whose deepe wounded mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With love long time did languish, as the striken hind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"At last it chaunced this proud Sarazin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To meete me wandring; who perforce me led</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With him away, but yet could never win</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Fort, that Ladies hold in soveraigne dread.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There lies he now with foule dishonor dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, whiles he livde, was called proud Sans foy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The eldest of three brethren; all three bred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of one bad sire, whose youngest is Sans joy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And twixt them both was born the bloody bold Sans loy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"In this sad plight, friendlesse, unfortunate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now miserable I, Fidessa, dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Craving of you, in pity of my state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To doe none ill, if please ye not doe well."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He in great passion al this while did dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More busying his quicke eies her face to view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then his dull eares to heare what shee did tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said, "faire lady, hart of flint would rew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The undeserved woes and sorrowes, which me shew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Henceforth in safe assuraunce may ye rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having both found a new friend to your aid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lost an old foe that did you molest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Better new friend than an old foe is said."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With chaunge of chear the seeming simple maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let fal her eien, as shamefast, to the earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yeelding soft, in that she nought gainsaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So forth they rode, he feining seemely merth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shee coy lookes: so dainty, they say, maketh derth.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Long time they thus together traveiled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Til, weary of their way, they came at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where grew two goodly trees, that faire did spred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their armes abroad, with gray mosse overcast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And their greene leaves, trembling with every blast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made a calme shadowe far in compasse round:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fearefull shepheard, often there aghast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under them never sat, ne wont there sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His mery oaten pipe, but shund th'unlucky ground.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But this good knight, soone as he them can spie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the coole shade him thither hastly got:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For golden Phoebus, now ymounted hie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From fiery wheeles of his faire chariot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hurled his beame so scorching cruell hot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That living creature mote it not abide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his new Lady it endured not.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There they alight, in hope themselves to hide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the fierce heat, and rest their weary limbs a tide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Faire seemely pleasaunce each to other makes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With goodly purposes, there as they sit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his falsed fancy he her takes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be the fairest wight that lived yit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to expresse he bends his gentle wit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, thinking of those braunches greene to frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A girlond for her dainty forehead fit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He pluckt a bough; out of whose rifte there came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Small drops of gory blood, that trickled down the same.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith a piteous yelling voice was heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Crying, "O! spare with guilty hands to teare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My tender sides in this rough rynd embard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But fly, ah! fly far hence away, for feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least to you hap that happened to me heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to this wretched Lady, my deare love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O, too deare love, love bought with death too deare!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Astond he stood, and up his heare did hove;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with that suddein horror could no member move.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last whenas the dreadfull passion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was overpast, and manhood well awake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet musing at the straunge occasion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doubting much his fence, he thus bespake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"What voice of damned Ghost from Limbo lake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or guilefull spright wandring in empty aire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both which fraile men doe oftentimes mistake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sends to my doubtful eares these speaches rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ruefull plaints, me bidding guiltlesse blood to spare?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then groning deep; "Nor damned Ghost," (quoth he,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Nor guileful sprite to thee these words doth speake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But once a man, Fradubio, now a tree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wretched man, wretched tree! whose nature weake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A cruell witch, her cursed will to wreake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath thus transformed, and plast in open plaines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where Boreas doth blow full bitter bleake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And scorching Sunne does dry my secret vaines;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For though a tree I seme, yet cold and heat me paines."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Say on Fradubio, then, or man or tree,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quoth then the Knight; "by whose mischievous arts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Art thou misshaped thus, as now I see?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He oft finds med'cine who his griefe imparts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But double griefs afflict concealing harts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As raging flames who striveth to suppresse."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"The author then," (said he) "of all my smarts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is one Duessa, a false sorceresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That many errant knights hath broght to wretchednesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"In prime of youthly yeares, when corage hott</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fire of love, and joy of chevalree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First kindled in my breast, it was my lott</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To love this gentle Lady, whome ye see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now not a Lady, but a teeming tree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With whome, as once I rode accompanyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me chaunced of a knight encountred be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That had a like faire Lady by his syde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a faire Lady, but did fowle Duessa hyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Whose forged beauty he did take in hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All other Dames to have exceeded farre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I in defence of mine did likewise stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mine, that did then shine as the Morning starre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So both to batteill fierce arraunged arre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which his harder fortune was to fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under my speare: such is the dye of warre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His Lady, left as a prise martiall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did yield her comely person to be at my call.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"So doubly lov'd of ladies, unlike faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th'one seeming such, the other such indeede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One day in doubt I cast for to compare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether in beauties glorie did exceede:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Rosy girlond was the victors meede.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both seemde to win, and both seemde won to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So hard the discord was to be agreede.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fraslissa was as faire as faire mote bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ever false Duessa seemde as faire as shee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"The wicked witch, now seeing all this while</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The doubtfull ballaunce equally to sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What not by right she cast to win by guile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by her hellish science raisd streight way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A foggy mist, that overcast the day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And a dull blast, that breathing on her face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dimmed her former beauties shining ray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with foule ugly forme did her disgrace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then was she fayre alone, when none was faire in place.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Then cride she out, 'Fye, fye! deformed wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose borrowed beautie now appeareth plaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To have before bewitched all mens sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O! leave her soone, or let her soone be slaine.'</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her loathly visage viewing with disdaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones I thought her such as she me told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And would have killed her; but with faigned paine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The false witch did my wrathfull hand with-hold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So left her, where she now is turnd to treen mould.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Thensforth I tooke Duessa for my Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the witch unweeting joyd long time;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever wist but that she was the same;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till on a day (that day is everie Prime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When Witches wont do penance for their crime,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I chaunst to see her in her proper hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bathing her selfe in origane and thyme:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A filthy foule old woman I did vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ever to have toucht her I did deadly rew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Her neather partes misshapen, monstruous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were hidd in water, that I could not see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But they did seeme more foule and hideous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then womans shape man would believe to bee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thensforth from her most beastly companie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I gan refraine, in minde to slipp away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone as appeard safe opportunitie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For danger great, if not assurd decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw before mine eyes, if I were knowne to stray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"The divelish hap: by chaunges of my cheare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perceiv'd my thought; and, drownd in sleepie night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With wicked herbes and oyntments did besmeare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My body all, through charmes and magicke might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all my senses were bereaved quight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then brought she me into this desert waste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by my wretched lovers side me pight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where now, enclosd in wooden wals full faste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Banisht from living wights, our wearie daies we waste."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But how long time," said then the Elfin knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Are you in this misformed house to dwell?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"We may not chaunge," (quoth he,) "this evil plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till we be bathed in a living well:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is the terme prescribed by the spell."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"O! how," sayd he, "mote I that well out find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That may restore you to your wonted well?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Time and suffused fates to former kynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall us restore; none else from hence may us unbynd."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The false Duessa, now Fidessa hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Heard how in vaine Fradubio did lament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And knew well all was true. But the good knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of sad feare and ghastly dreriment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When all this speech the living tree had spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bleeding bough did thrust into the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from the blood he might be innocent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with fresh clay did close the wooden wound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, turning to his Lady, dead with feare her fownd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her seeming dead he found with feigned feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As all unweeting of that well she knew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And paynd himselfe with busie care to reare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her out of carelesse swowne. Her eyelids blew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dimmed sight, with pale and deadly hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last she up gan lift: with trembling cheare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her up he tooke, (too simple and too trew)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oft her kist. At length, all passed feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He set her on her steede, and forward forth did beare.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-3" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Forsaken Truth long seeks her love,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And makes the Lyon mylde;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Marres blide Devotions mart and fals</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In hand of lechour vylde.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Nought is there under heav'ns wide hollownesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That moves more deare compassion of mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then beautie brought t'unworthie wretchednesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through envies snares, or fortunes freakes unkind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I, whether lately through her brightnes blynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or through alleageance, and fast fealty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which I do owe unto all womankynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Feele my hart perst with so great agony,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When such I see, that all for pitty I could dy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now it is empassioned so deepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For fairest Unaes sake, of whom I sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That my frayle eies these lines with teares do steepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To thinke how she through guyleful handeling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though true as touch, though daughter of a king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though faire as ever living wight was fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though nor in word nor deede ill meriting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is from her knight divorced in despayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her dew loves deryv'd to that vile witches shayre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet she, most faithfull Ladie, all this while</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forsaken, wofull, solitarie mayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far from all peoples preace, as in exile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In wildernesse and wastfull deserts strayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke her knight; who, subtily betrayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through that late vision which th'Enchaunter wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had her abandond. She, of nought affrayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through woods and wastnes wide him daily sought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet wished tydinges none of him unto her brought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One day, nigh wearie of the yrkesome way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From her unhastie beast she did alight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on the grasse her dainty limbs did lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In secrete shadow, far from all mens sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From her fayre head her fillet she undight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And layd her stole aside. Her angels face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As the great eye of heaven, shyned bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made a sunshine in the shady place:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did never mortall eye behold such heavenly grace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It fortuned, out of the thickest wood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A ramping Lyon rushed suddeinly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hunting full greedy after salvage blood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone as the royall virgin he did spy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With gaping mouth at her ran greedily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To have attonce devourd her tender corse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to the pray when as he drew more ny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His bloody rage aswaged with remorse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, with the sight amazd, forgat his furious forse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In stead thereof he kist her wearie feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lickt her lilly hands with fawning tong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he her wronged innocence did weet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O, how can beautie maister the most strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And simple truth subdue avenging wrong!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose yielded pryde and proud submission,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still dreading death, when she had marked long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her hart gan melt in great compassion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drizling teares did shed for pure affection.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"The Lyon, Lord of everie beast in field,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quoth she, "his princely puissance doth abate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mightie proud to humble weake does yield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forgetfull of the hungry rage, which late</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him prickt, in pittie of my sad estate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he, my Lyon, and my noble Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How does he find in cruell hart to hate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her, that him lov'd, and ever most adord</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the God of my life? why hath he me abhord?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Redounding teares did choke th'end of her plaint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which softly ecchoed from the neighbour wood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, sad to see her sorrowfull constraint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The kingly beast upon her gazing stood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With pittie calmd downe fell his angry mood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last, in close hart shutting up her payne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arose the virgin, borne of heavenly brood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to her snowy Palfrey got agayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To seeke her strayed Champion if she might attayne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Lyon would not leave her desolate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with her went along, as a strong gard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her chast person, and a faythfull mate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her sad troubles and misfortunes hard:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still, when she slept, he kept both watch and ward;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, when she wakt, he wayted diligent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With humble service to her will prepard:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From her fayre eyes he tooke commandement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ever by her lookes conceived her intent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Long she thus travelled through deserts wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which she thought her wandring knight shold pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet never shew of living wight espyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that at length she found the troden gras,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which the tradl: of peoples footing was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under the steepe foot of a mountaine hore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The same she followes, till at last she has</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A damzel spyde, slow footing her before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That on her shoulders sad a pot of water bore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom approching she to her gan call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet, if dwelling place were nigh at hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the rude wench her answer'd nought at all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She could not heare, nor speake, nor understand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till, seeing by her side the Lyon stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With suddeine feare her pitcher downe she threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fled away: for never in that land</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Face of fayre Ladie she before did vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that dredd Lyons looke her cast in deadly hew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Full fast she fled, ne ever lookt behynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if her life upon the wager lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And home she came, whereas her mother blynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sate in eternall night: nought could she say;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, suddeine catching hold, did her dismay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With quaking hands, and other signes of feare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, full of ghastly fright and cold affray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan shut the dore. By this arrived there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dame Una, weary Dame, and entrance did requere.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when none yielded, her unruly Page</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his rude clawes the wicket open rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And let her in; where, of his cruell rage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nigh dead with feare, and faint astonishment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee found them both in darksome corner pent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where that old woman day and night did pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon her beads, devoutly penitent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nine hundred <i>Pater nosters</i> every day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thrise nine hundred <i>Aves</i> she was wont to say.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And to augment her painefull penaunce more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrise every weeke in ashes shee did sitt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And next her wrinkled skin rough sackecloth wore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thrise three times did fast from any bitt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But now, for feare her beads she did forgett:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose needlesse dread for to remove away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Una framed words and count'naunce fitt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which hardly doen, at length she gan them pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in their cotage small that night she rest her may.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The day is spent; and commeth drowsie night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When every creature shrowded is in sleepe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sad Una downe her laies in weary plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at her feete the Lyon watch doth keepe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In stead of rest she does lament and weepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the late losse of her deare loved knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sighes, and grones, and evermore does steepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her tender brest in bitter teares all night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All night she thinks too long, and often lookes for light.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now when Aldeboran was mounted hye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above the shinie Cassiopeias chaire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all in deadly sleepe did drowned lye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One knocked at the dore, and in would fare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He knocked fast, and often curst, and sware,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ready entraunce was not at his call;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For on his backe a heavy load he bare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of nightly stelths, and pillage severall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which he had got abroad by purchas criminall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He was, to weete, a stout and sturdy thiefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wont to robbe churches of their ornaments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And poore mens boxes of their due reliefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which given was to them for good intents:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The holy Saints of their rich vestiments</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He did disrobe, when all men carelesse slept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And spoild the Priests of their habiliments;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles none the holy things in safety kept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he by conning sleights in at the window crept.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And all that he by right or wrong could find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto this house he brought, and did bestow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the daughter of this woman blind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abessa, daughter of Corceca slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With whom he whoredome usd, that few did know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fed her fatt with feast of offerings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And plenty, which in all the land did grow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne spared he to give her gold and rings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now he to her brought part of his stolen things.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus, long the dore with rage and threats he bett,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet of those fearfull women none durst rize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Lyon frayed them, him in to lett.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He would no lenger stay him to advize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But open breakes the dore in furious wize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And entring is, when that disdainfull beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Encountring fierce, him suddein doth surprize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, seizing cruell clawes on trembling brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under his Lordly foot him proudly hath supprest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Him booteth not resist, nor succour call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His bleeding hart is in the vengers hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who streight him rent in thousand peeces small,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And quite dismembred hath: the thirsty land</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dronke up his life; his corse left on the strand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His fearefull freends weare out the wofull night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne dare to weepe, nor seeme to understand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The heavie hap which on them is alight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Affraid least to themselves the like mishappen might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now when broad day the world discovered has,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Up Una rose, up rose the lyon eke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on their former journey forward pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In waies unknowne, her wandring knight to seeke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With paines far passing that long wandring Greeke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That for his love refused deitye.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such were the labours of this Lady meeke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still seeking him, that from her still did flye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then furthest from her hope, when most she weened nye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as she parted thence, the fearfull twayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That blind old woman, and her daughter deare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came forth; and, finding Kirkrapine there slayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For anguish great they gan to rend their heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And beat their brests, and naked flesh to teare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when they both had wept and wayld their fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then forth they ran, like two amazed deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Halfe mad through malice and revenging will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To follow her that was the causer of their ill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whome overtaking, they gan loudly bray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hollow houling, and lamenting cry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shamefully at her rayling all the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her accusing of dishonesty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was the flowre of faith and chastity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And still, amidst her rayling, she did pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That plagues, and mischiefes, and long misery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might fall on her, and follow all the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that in endlesse error she might ever stray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, when she saw her prayers nought prevaile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee backe retourned with some labour lost;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the way, as shee did weepe and waile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A knight her met in mighty armes embost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet knight was not for all his bragging bost;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But subtill Archimag, that Una sought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By traynes into new troubles to have toste:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that old woman tidings he besought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If that of such a Lady shee could tellen ought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith she gan her passion to renew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cry, and curse, and raile, and rend her heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saying, that harlott she too lately knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That causd her shed so many a bitter teare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so forth told the story of her feare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much seemed he to mone her haplesse chaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after for that Lady did inquere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which being taught, he forward gan advaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His fair enchaunted steed, and eke his charmed launce.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ere long he came where Una traveild slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that wilde champion wayting her besyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whome seeing such, for dread hee durst not show</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him selfe too nigh at hand, but turned wyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto an hil; from whence when she him spyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By his like seeming shield her knight by name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She weend it was, and towards him gan ride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Approaching nigh she wist it was the same;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with faire fearefull humblesse towards him shee came</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And weeping said, "Ah, my long lacked Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where have ye bene thus long out of my sight?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much feared I to have bene quite abhord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ought have done, that ye displeasen might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That should as death unto my deare heart light:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For since mine eye your joyous sight did mis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My chearefull day is turnd to chearelesse night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke my night of death the shadow is;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But welcome now, my light, and shining lampe of blis!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He thereto meeting said, "My dearest Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far be it from your thought, and fro my wil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To thinke that knighthood I so much should shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As you to leave that have me loved stil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chose in Faery court, of meere goodwil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where noblest knights were to be found on earth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The earth shall sooner leave her kindly skil</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bring forth fruit, and make eternal derth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then I leave you, my liefe, yborn of hevenly berth.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And sooth to say, why I lefte you so long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was for to seeke adventure in straunge place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where, Archimago said, a felon strong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To many knights did daily worke disgrace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But knight he now shall never more deface:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Good cause of mine excuse, that mote ye please</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well to accept, and evermore embrace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My faithfull service, that by land and seas</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have vowd you to defend. Now then, your plaint appease."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His lovely words her seemd due recompence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all her passed paines: one loving howre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For many yeares of sorrow can dispence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A dram of sweete is worth a pound of sowre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee has forgott how many a woeful stowre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For him she late endurd; she speakes no more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of past: true is, that true love hath no powre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To looken backe; his eies be fixt before.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before her stands her knight, for whom she toyld so sore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Much like, as when the beaten marinere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That long hath wandred in the Ocean wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ofte soust in swelling Tethys saltish teare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And long time having tand his tawney hide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With blustring breath of Heaven, that none can bide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And scorching flames of fierce Orions hound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone as the port from far he has espide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His chearfull whistle merily doth sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Nereus crownes with cups; his mates him pledg around.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such joy made Una, when her knight she found;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke th'enchaunter joyous seemde no lesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then the glad marchant, that does vew from ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His ship far come from watrie wildernesse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He hurles out vowes, and Neptune oft doth blesse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So forth they past; and all the way they spent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Discoursing of her dreadful late distresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which he askt her, what the Lyon ment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who told her all that fell, in journey as she went.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They had not ridden far, when they might see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One pricking towards them with hastie heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full strongly armd, and on a courser free</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That through his fiersnesse fomed all with sweat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the sharpe yron did for anger eat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When his hot ryder spurd his chauffed side:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His looke was sterne, and seemed still to threat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cruell revenge, which he in hart did hyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on his shield <i>Sansloy</i> in bloody lines was dyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When nigh he drew unto this gentle payre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saw the Red-crosse which the knight did beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He burnt in fire; and gan eftsoones prepare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himselfe to batteill with his couched speare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Loth was that other, and did faint through feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To taste th'untryed dint of deadly steele:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yet his Lady did so well him cheare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hope of new good hap he gan to feele;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So bent his speare, and spurd his horse with yron heele.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But that proud Paynim forward came so ferce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And full of wrath, that, with his sharphead speare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through vainly crossed shield he quite did perce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, had his staggering steed not shronke for feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through shield and body eke he should him beare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, so great was the puissance of his push,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from his sadle quite he did him beare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He, tombling rudely downe, to ground did rush,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from his gored wound a well of bloud did gush.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Dismounting lightly from his loftie steed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He to him lept, in minde to reave his lire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And proudly said; "Lo! there the worthie meed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of him that slew Sansfoy with bloody knife:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Henceforth his ghost, freed from repining strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In peace may passen over Lethe lake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When mourning altars, purgd with enimies life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The black infernall Furies doen aslake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Life from Sansfoy thou tookst, Sansloy shall from thee take."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith in haste his helmet gan unlace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till Una cride, "O! hold that heavie hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deare Sir, what ever that thou be in place:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enough is, that thy foe doth vanquisht stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now at thy mercy: Mercy not withstand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he is one the truest knight alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though conquered now he lye on lowly land;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, whilest him fortune favourd, fayre did thrive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In bloudy field; therefore, of life him not deprive."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her piteous wordes might not abate his rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, rudely rending up his helmet, would</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have slayne him streight; but when he sees his age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hoarie head of Archimago old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His hasty hand he doth amased hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And halfe ashamed wondred at the sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the old man well knew he, though untold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In charmes and magick to have wondrous might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne ever wont in field, ne in round lists, to fight:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And said, "Why Archimago, lucklesse syre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What doe I see? what hard mishap is this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hath thee hether brought to taste mine yre?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or thine the fault, or mine the error is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In stead of foe to wound my friend amis?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He answered nought, but in a traunce still lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on those guilefull dazed eyes of his</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cloude of death did sit. Which doen away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He left him lying so, ne would no lenger stay:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But to the virgin comes; who all this while</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amased stands, her selfe so mockt to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By him, who has the guerdon of his guile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For so misfeigning her true knight to bee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet is she now in more perplexitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Left in the hand of that same Paynim bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whom her booteth not at all to flie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, by her cleanly garment catching hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her from her Palfrey pluckt, her visage to behold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But her fiers servant, full of kingly aw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And high disdaine, whenas his soveraine Dame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So rudely handled by her foe he saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With gaping jawes full greedy at him came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, ramping on his shield, did weene the same</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have reft away with his sharp rending clawes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he was stout, and lust did now inflame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His corage more, that from his griping pawes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He hath his shield redeemd, and forth his swerd he drawes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O! then, too weake and feeble was the forse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of salvage beast his puissance to withstand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he was strong, and of so mightie corse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As ever wielded speare in warlike hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And feates of armes did wisely understand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eft soones he perced through his chaufed chest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With thrilling point of deadly yron brand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And launcht his Lordly hart: with death opprest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He ror'd aloud, whiles life forsooke his stubborne brest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who now is left to keepe the forlorne maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From raging spoile of lawlesse victors will?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her faithfull gard remov'd, her hope dismaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her selfe a yielded pray to save or spill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He now, Lord of the field, his pride to fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With foule reproches and disdaineful spight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her vildly entertaines; and, will or nill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beares her away upon his courser light:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her prayers nought prevaile, his rage is more of might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And all the way, with great lamenting paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And piteous plaintes, she filleth his dull eares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That stony hart could riven have in twaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the way she wetts with flowing teares;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he, enrag'd with rancor, nothing heares.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her servile beast yet would not leave her so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But followes her far off, ne ought he feares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be partaker of her wandring woe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More mild in beastly kind then that her beastly foe.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-4" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>To sinfull house of Pryde Duessa</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Guydes the faithfull knight;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where, brothers death to wreak, Sansjoy</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Doth challenge him to fight.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Young knight whatever, that dost armes professe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through long labours huntest after fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beware of fraud, beware of ficklenesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In choice, and chaunge of thy deare-loved Dame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least thou of her believe too lightly blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rash misweening doe thy hart remove:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For unto knight there is no greater shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then lightnesse and inconstancie in love:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That doth this Redcrosse knights ensample plainly prove.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who, after that he had faire Una lorne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through light misdeeming of her loialtie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And false Duessa in her sted had borne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Called Fidess', and so supposd to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long with her traveild; till at last they see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A goodly building bravely garnished;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The house of mightie Prince it seemd to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And towards it a broad high way that led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All bare through peoples feet which thether traveiled.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Great troupes of people traveild thetherward</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both day and night, of each degree and place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But few returned, having scaped hard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With balefull beggery, or foule disgrace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which ever after in most wretched case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like loathsome lazars, by the hedges lay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thether Duessa badd him bend his pace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she is wearie of the toilsom way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And also nigh consumed is the lingring day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A stately Pallace built of squared bricke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which cunningly was without morter laid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose wals were high, but nothing strong nor thick,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And golden foile all over them displaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That purest skye with brightnesse they dismaid:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">High lifted up were many loftie towres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And goodly galleries far over laid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of faire windowes and delightful bowres:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the top a Diall told the timely howres.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It was a goodly heape for to behould,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And spake the praises of the workmans witt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But full great pittie, that so faire a mould</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did on so weake foundation ever sitt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For on a sandie hill, that still did flitt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fall away, it mounted was full hie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That every breath of heaven shaked itt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the hinder partes, that few could spie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were ruinous and old, but painted cunningly.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Arrived there, they passed in forth right;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For still to all the gates stood open wide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet charge of them was to a Porter hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cald Malvenu, who entrance none denide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence to the hall, which was on every side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With rich array and costly arras dight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Infinite sortes of people did abide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There waiting long, to win the wished sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of her, that was the Lady of that Pallace bright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By them they passe, all gazing on them round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the Presence mount; whose glorious vew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their frayle amazed senses did confound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In living Princes court none ever knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such endlesse richesse, and so sumpteous shew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne Persia selfe, the nourse of pompous pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like ever saw. And there a noble crew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Lords and Ladies stood on every side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which with their presence fayre the place much beautifide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>High above all a cloth of State was spred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And a rich throne, as bright as sunny day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which there sate, most brave embellished</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With royall robes and gorgeous array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A mayden Queene that shone as Titans ray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In glistring gold and perelesse pretious stone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet her bright blazing beautie did assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To dim the brightnesse of her glorious throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As envying her selfe, that too exceeding shone:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Exceeding shone, like Phoebus fayrest childe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That did presume his fathers fyrie wayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And flaming mouthes of steedes, unwonted wilde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through highest heaven with weaker hand to rayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proud of such glory and advancement vayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While flashing beames do daze his feeble eyen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He leaves the welkin way most beaten playne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, rapt with whirling wheeles, inflames the skyen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With fire not made to burne, but fayrely for to shyne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So proud she shyned in her Princely state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Looking to heaven, for earth she did disdayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sitting high, for lowly she did hate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lo underneath her scornefull feete was layne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A dreadfull Dragon with an hideous trayne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in her hand she held a mirrhour bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein her face she often vewed fayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in her selfe-lov'd semblance tooke delight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For she was wondrous faire, as any living wight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Of griesly Pluto she the daughter was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sad Proserpina, the Queene of hell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet did she thinke her pearelesse worth to pas</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That parentage, with pride so did she swell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thundring Jove, that high in heaven doth dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wield the world, she claymed for her syre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or if that any else did Jove excell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For to the highest she did still aspyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, if ought higher were than that, did it desyre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And proud Lucifera men did her call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That made her selfe a Queene, and crownd to be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet rightfull kingdome she had none at all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne heritage of native soveraintie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But did usurpe with wrong and tyrannic</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the scepter which she now did hold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ruld her Realme with lawes, but pollicie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strong advizement of six wisards old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, with their counsels bad, her kingdome did uphold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as the Elfin knight in presence came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And false Duessa, seeming Lady fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A gentle Husher, Vanitie by name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made rowme, and passage for them did prepaire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So goodly brought them to the lowest stayre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her high throne; where they, on humble knee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Making obeysaunce, did the cause declare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why they were come her roiall state to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To prove the wide report of her great Majestee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With loftie eyes, halfe loth to looke so lowe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She thancked them in her disdainefull wise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne other grace vouchsafed them to showe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Princesse worthy; scarse them bad arise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her Lordes and Ladies all this while devise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Themselves to setten forth to straungers sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some frounce their curled heare in courtly guise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some prancke their ruffes; and others trimly dight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their gay attyre; each others greater pride does spight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Goodly they all that knight doe entertayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right glad with him to have increast their crew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to Duess' each one himselfe did payne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All kindnesse and faire courtesie to shew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For in that court whylome her well they knew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet the stout Faerie mongst the middest crowd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thought all their glorie vaine in knightly vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that great Princesse too exceeding prowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That to strange knight no better countenance allowd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Suddein upriseth from her stately place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The roiall Dame, and for her coche doth call:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All hurtlen forth; and she, with princely pace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As faire Aurora in her purple pall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the East the dawning day doth call.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So forth she comes; her brightnes brode doth blaze.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The heapes of people, thronging in the hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe ride each other upon her to gaze:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her glorious glitter and light doth all mens eies amaze.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So forth she comes, and to her coche does clyme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">; Adorned all with gold and girlonds gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemd as fresh as Flora in her prime;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strove to match, in roiall rich array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great Junoes golden chayre; the which, they say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gods stand gazing on, when she does ride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Joves high hous through heavens bras-paved way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drawne of fayre Pecocks, that excell in pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And full of Argus eyes their tayles dispredden wide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But this was drawne of six unequall beasts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which her six sage Counsellours did ryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Taught to obay their bestiall beheasts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With like conditions to their kindes applyde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which the first, that all the rest did guyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was sluggish Idlenesse, the nourse of sin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a slouthfull Asse he chose to ryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arayd in habit blacke, and amis thin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like to an holy Monck, the service to begin.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And in his hand his Portesse still he bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That much was worne, but therein little redd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For of devotion he had little care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still drownd in sleepe, and most of his daies dedd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Scarse could he once uphold his heavie hedd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To looken whether it were night or day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May seeme the wayne was very evill ledd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When such an one had guiding of the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That knew not whether right he went, or else astray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>From worldly cares himselfe he did esloyne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And greatly shunned manly exercise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From everie worke he chalenged essoyne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For contemplation sake: yet otherwise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His life he led in lawlesse riotise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which he grew to grievous malady;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For in his lustlesse limbs, through evil guise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A shaking fever raignd continually.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such one was Idlenesse, first of this company.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And by his side rode loathsome Gluttony,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deformed creature, on a filthie swyne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His belly was upblowne with luxury,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke with fatnesse swollen were his eyne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And like a Crane his necke was long and fyne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which he swallowed up excessive feast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For want whereof poore people oft did pyne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the way, most like a brutish beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He spued up his gorge, that all did him deteast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In greene vine leaves he was right fitly clad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For other clothes he could not weare for heate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on his head an yvie girland had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From under which fast trickled downe the sweat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still as he rode he somewhat still did eat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his hand did beare a bouzing can,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which he supt so oft, that on his seat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His dronken corse he scarse upholden can:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In shape and life more like a monster then a man.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Unfit he was for any worldly thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke unhable once to stirre or go;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not meet to be of counsell to a king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose mind in meat and drinke was drowned so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from his frend he seeldome knew his fo.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of diseases was his carcas blew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And a dry dropsie through his flesh did flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which by misdiet daily greater grew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such one was Gluttony, the second of that crew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And next to him rode lustfull Lechery</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a bearded Gote, whose rugged heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And whally eies (the signe of gelosy,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was like the person selfe whom he did beare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who rough, and blacke, and filthy, did appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unseemely man to please faire Ladies eye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet he of Ladies oft was loved deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When fairer faces were bid standen by:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O! who does know the bent of womens fantasy?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In a greene gowne he clothed was full faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which underneath did hide his filthinesse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his hand a burning hart he bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of vaine follies and new fanglenesse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he was false, and fraught with ficklenesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And learned had to love with secret lookes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And well could daunce, and sing with ruefulnesse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fortunes tell, and read in loving bookes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thousand other waies to bait his fleshly hookes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Inconstant man, that loved all he saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lusted after all that he did love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne would his looser life be tide to law,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But joyd weake wemens hearts to tempt, and prove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If from their loyall loves he might them move:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which lewdnes fild him with reprochfull pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that foule evill, which all men reprove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That rotts the marrow, and consumes the braine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such one was Lechery, the third of all this traine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And greedy Avarice by him did ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uppon a Camell loaden all with gold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two iron coffers hong on either side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With precious metall full as they might hold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his lap an heap of coine he told;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For of his wicked pelfe his God he made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto hell him selfe for money sold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Accursed usury was all his trade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And right and wrong ylike in equall ballaunce waide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His life was nigh unto deaths dore yplaste;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thred-bare cote, and cobled shoes, hee ware;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne scarse good morsell all his life did taste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But both from backe and belly still did spare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To fill his bags, and richesse to compare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet childe ne kinsman living had he none</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To leave them to; but thorough daily care</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To get, and nightly feare to lose his owne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He led a wretched life, unto himselfe unknowne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Most wretched wight, whom nothing might suffise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose greedy lust did lacke in greatest store;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose need had end, but no end covetise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose welth was want, whose plenty made him pore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who had enough, yett wished ever more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A vile disease: and eke in foote and hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A grievous gout tormented him full sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That well he could not touch, nor goe, nor stand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such one was Avarice, the fourth of this faire band.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And next to him malicious Envy rode</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a ravenous wolfe, and still did chaw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Between his cankred teeth a venemous tode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the poison ran about his chaw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But inwardly he chawed his owne maw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At neighbours welth, that made him ever sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For death it was, when any good he saw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wept, that cause of weeping none he had;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when he heard of harme he wexed wondrous glad.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All in a kirtle of discolourd say</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He clothed was, ypaynted full of eies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his bosome secretly there lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An hatefull Snake, the which his taile uptyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In many folds, and mortall sting implyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still as he rode he gnasht his teeth to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those heapes of gold with griple Covetyse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And grudged at the great felicitee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of proud Lucifera, and his owne companee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He hated all good workes and vertuous deeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him no lesse, that any like did use;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And who with gratious bread the hungry feeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His almes for want of faith he doth accuse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So every good to bad he doth abuse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the verse of famous Poets witt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He does backebite, and spightfull poison spues</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From leprous mouth on all that ever writt.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such one vile Envy was, that fifte in row did sitt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And him beside rides fierce revenging Wrath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a Lion, loth for to be led;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his hand a burning brond he hath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which he brandisheth about his hed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His eies did hurle forth sparcles fiery red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stared sterne on all that him beheld;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As ashes pale of hew, and seeming ded;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on his dagger still his hand he held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trembling through hasty rage when choler in him sweld,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His ruffin raiment all was staind with blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he had spilt, and all to rags yrent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through unadvized rashnes woxen wood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For of his hands he had no governement:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne car'd for blood in his avengement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when the furious fitt was overpast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His cruel facts he often would repent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, wilfull man, he never would forecast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How many mischieves should ensue his heedlesse hast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Full many mischiefes follow cruell Wrath:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abhorred bloodshed, and tumultuous strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unmanly murder, and unthrifty scath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bitter despight, with rancours rusty knife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fretting griefe, the enemy of life:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All these, and many evils moe haunt ire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The swelling Splene, and Frenzy raging rife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The shaking Palsey, and Saint Fraunces fire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such one was Wrath, the last of this ungodly tire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, after all, upon the wagon beame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rode Sathan with a smarting whip in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which he forward lasht the laesy teme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So oft as Slowth still in the mire did stand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Huge routs of people did about them band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Showting for joy; and still before their way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A foggy mist had covered all the land;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, underneath their feet, all scattered lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dead sculls and bones of men whose life had gone astray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So forth they marchen in this goodly sort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To take the solace of the open aire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in fresh flowring fields themselves to sport:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emongst the rest rode that false Lady faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The foule Duessa, next unto the chaire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of proud Lucifer', as one of the traine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that good knight would not so nigh repaire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him selfe estraunging from their joyaunce vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose fellowship seemd far unfitt for warlike swaine,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So, having solaced themselves a space</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With pleasaunce of the breathing fields yfed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They backe retourned to the princely Place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereas an errant knight in armes ycled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heathnish shield, wherein with letters red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was writt <i>Sansjoy</i>, they new arrived find:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enflam'd with fury and fiers hardy hed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He seemd in hart to harbour thoughts unkind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And nourish bloody vengeaunce in his bitter mind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who, when the shamed shield of slaine Sansfoy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He spide with that same Faery champions page,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bewraying him that did of late destroy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His eldest brother; burning all with rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He to him lept, and that same envious gage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> ors glory from him snacht away:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But th'Elfin knight, which ought that warlike wage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disdaind to loose the meed he wonne in fray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, him rencountring fierce, reskewd the noble pray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith they gan to hurtlen greedily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Redoubted battaile ready to darrayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And clash their shields, and shake their swerds on hy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with their sturre they troubled all the traine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that great Queene, upon eternall paine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of high displeasure that ensewen might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Commaunded them their fury to refraine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, if that either to that shield had right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In equall lists they should the morrow next it fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ah dearest Dame," quoth then the Paynim bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Pardon the error of enraged wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whome great griefe made forgett the raines to hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of reasons rule, to see this recreaunt knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No knight, but treachour full of false despight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shameful treason, who through guile hath slayn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The prowest knight that ever field did fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even stout Sansfoy, (O who can then refrayn?)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose shield he beares renverst, the more to heap disdayn,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And, to augment the glorie of his guile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His dearest love, the faire Fidessa, loe!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is there possessed of the traytour vile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who reapes the harvest sowen by his foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sowen in bloodie field, and bought with woe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That brothers hand shall dearely well requight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So be, O Queene! you equall favour showe."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him litle answerd th'angry Elfin knight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He never meant with words, but swords, to plead his right:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But threw his gauntlet, as a sacred pledge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His cause in combat the next day to try:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So been they parted both, with harts on edge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be aveng'd each on his enimy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That night they pas in joy and jollity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Feasting and courting both in bowre and hall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Steward was excessive Gluttony,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of his plenty poured forth to all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which doen, the Chamberlain, Slowth, did to rest them call.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now whenas darkesome night had all displayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her coleblacke curtein over brightest skye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The warlike youthes, on dayntie couches layd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did chace away sweet sleepe from sluggish eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To muse on meanes of hoped victory.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But whenas Morpheus had with leaden mace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arrested all that courtly company,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uprose Duessa from her resting place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the Paynims lodging comes with silent pace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom broad awake she findes, in troublous fitt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fore-casting how his foe he might annoy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him amoves with speaches seeming fitt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ah deare Sansjoy, next dearest to Sansfoy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cause of my new griefe, cause of my new joy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Joyous to see his ymage in mine eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And greevd to thinke how foe did him destroy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was the flowre of grace and chevalrye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo! his Fidessa, to thy secret faith I flye."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With gentle wordes he can her fayrely greet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bad say on the secrete of her hart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, sighing soft; "I learne that litle sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oft tempred is," (quoth she,) "with muchell smart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For since my brest was launcht with lovely dart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of deare Sansfoy, I never joyed howre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in eternall woes my weaker hart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have wasted, loving him with all my powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for his sake have felt full many an heavie stowre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"At last, when perils all I weened past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hop'd to reape the crop of all my care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into new woes unweeting I was cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By this false faytor, who unworthie ware</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His worthie shield; whom he with guilefull snare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Entrapped slew, and brought to shamefull grave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me, silly maid, away with him he bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever since hath kept in darksom cave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that I would not yeeld that to Sansfoy I gave.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But since faire Sunne hath sperst that lowring clowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to my loathed life now shewes some light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under your beames I will me safely shrowd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From dreaded storme of his disdainfull spight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To you th'inheritance belonges by right</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of brothers prayse, to you eke longes his love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let not his love, let not his restlesse spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be unreveng'd, that calles to you above</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From wandring Stygian shores, where it doth endlesse move."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereto said he, "Faire Dame, be nought dismaid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For sorrowes past; their griefe is with them gone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne yet of present perill be airraid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For needlesse feare did never vantage none;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And helplesse hap it booteth not to mone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dead is Sansfoy, his vitall paines are past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though greeved ghost for vengeance deep do grone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He lives that shall him pay his dewties last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And guiltie Elfin blood shall sacrifice in hast."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"O! but I feare the fickle freakes," (quoth shee)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Of fortune false, and oddes of armes in field."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Why, dame," (quoth he) "what oddes can ever bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where both doe fight alike, to win or yield?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Yea, but," (quoth she) "he beares a charmed shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke enchaunted armes, that none can perce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne none can wound the man that does them wield."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Charmed or enchaunted," answerd he then ferce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"I no whitt reck; ne you the like need to reherce.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But, faire Fidessa, sithens fortunes guile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or enimies powre, hath now captived you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Returne from whence ye came, and rest a while,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till morrow next that I the Elfe subdew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with Sansfoyes dead dowry you endew."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ah me! that is a double death," (she said)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"With proud foes sight my sorrow to renew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where ever yet I be, my secret aide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall follow you." So, passing forth, she him obaid.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-5" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The faithful knight in equal field</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Subdues his faithlesse foe;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whom false Duessa saves, and for</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">His cure to hell does goe.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The noble hart that harbours vertuous thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And is with childe of glorious great intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can never rest, untill it forth have brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th'eternall brood of glorie excellent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such restlesse passion did all night torment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The flaming corage of that Faery knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Devizing how that doughtie turnament</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With greatest honour he atchieven might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still did he wake, and still did watch for dawning light.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last, the golden Orientall gate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of greatest heaven gan to open fayre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Phoebus, fresh as brydegrome to his mate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came dauncing forth, shaking his deawie hayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hurld his glistring beams through gloomy ayre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when the wakeful Elfe perceiv'd, streight way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He started up, and did him selfe prepayre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In sunbright armes, and battailous array;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For with that Pagan proud he combatt will that day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And forth he comes into the commune hall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where earely waite him many a gazing eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet what end to straunger knights may fall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There many Minstrales maken melody,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To drive away the dull melancholy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many Bardes, that to the trembling chord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can tune their timely voices cunningly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many Chroniclers, that can record</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old loves, and warres for Ladies doen by many a Lord.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone after comes the cruell Sarazin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In woven maile all armed warily;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sternly lookes at him, who not a pin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Does care for looke of living creatures eye.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They bring them wines of Greece and Araby,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And daintie spices fetch from furthest Ynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To kindle heat of corage privily;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the wine a solemne oth they bynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>T'observe the sacred lawes of armes that are assynd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last forth comes that far renowmed Queene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With royall pomp and princely majestic</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She is ybrought unto a paled greene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And placed under stately canapee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The warlike feates of both those knights to see.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On th'other side in all mens open vew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Duessa placed is, and on a tree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sansfoy his shield is hangd with bloody hew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both those the lawrell girlonds to the victor dew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A shrilling trompett sownded from on hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto battaill bad them selves addresse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their shining shieldes about their wrestes they tye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And burning blades about their heades doe blesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The instruments of wrath and heavinesse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With greedy force each other doth assayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strike so fiercely, that they do impresse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deepe dinted furrowes in the battred mayle:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The yron walles to ward their blowes are weak and fraile.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Sarazin was stout and wondrous strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heaped blowes like yron hammers great;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For after blood and vengeance he did long:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The knight was fiers, and full of youthly heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doubled strokes, like dreaded thunders threat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all for praise and honour he did fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both stricken stryke, and beaten both doe beat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from their shields forth flyeth fine light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hewen helmets deepe shew marks of cithers might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So th'one for wrong, the other strives for right.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As when a Gryfon, seized of his pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Dragon fiers encountreth in his flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through widest ayre making his ydle way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That would his rightfull ravine rend away:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hideous horror both together smight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And souce so sore that they the heavens affray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wise Southsayer, seeing so sad sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th'amazed vulgar telles of warres and mortall fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So th'one for wrong, the other strives for right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And each to deadly shame would drive his foe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cruell steele so greedily doth bight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In tender flesh, that streames of blood down flow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which the armes, that earst so bright did show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into a pure vermillion now are dyde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great ruth in all the gazers harts did grow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeing the gored woundes to gape so wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That victory they dare not wish to either side.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last the Paynim chaunst to cast his eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His suddein eye flaming with wrathfull fyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his brothers shield, which hong thereby:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith redoubled was his raging yre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said; "Ah! wretched sonne of wofull syre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doest thou sit wayling by blacke Stygian lake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whylest here thy shield is hangd for victors hyre?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, sluggish german, doest thy forces slake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To after-send his foe, that him may overtake?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Goe, caytive Elfe, him quickly overtake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soone redeeme from his long-wandring woe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Goe, guiltie ghost, to him my message make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I his shield have quit from dying foe."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith upon his crest he stroke him so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That twise he reeled, readie twise to fall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">End of the doubtfull battaile deemed tho</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The lookers on; and lowd to him gan call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The false Duessa, "Thine the shield, and I, and all!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as the Faerie heard his Ladie speake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of his swowning dreame he gan awake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And quickning faith, that earst was woxen weake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The creeping deadly cold away did shake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho mov'd with wrath, and shame, and Ladies sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all attonce he cast avengd to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with so' exceeding furie at him strake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That forced him to stoupe upon his knee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had he not stouped so, he should have cloven bee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And to him said; "Goe now, proud Miscreant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thyselfe thy message do to german deare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alone he, wandring, thee too long doth want:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Goe say, his foe thy shield with his doth beare."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith his heavie hand he high gan reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him to have slaine; when lo! a darkesome clowd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon him fell: he no where doth appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But vanisht is. The Elfe him calls alowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But answer none receives; the darknes him does shrowd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In haste Duessa from her place arose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to him running said; "O! prowest knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ever Ladie to her love did chose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let now abate the terrour of your might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And quench the flame of furious despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bloodie vengeance: lo! th'infernall powres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Covering your foe with cloud of deadly night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have borne him hence to Plutoes balefull bowres:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The conquest yours, I yours, the shield and glory yours.'</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Not all so satisfide, with greedy eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He sought all round about, his thristy blade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bathe in blood of faithlesse enimy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who all that while lay hid in secret shade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He standes amazed how he thence should fade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last the trumpets Triumph sound on hie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And running Heralds humble homage made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Greeting him goodly with new viclorie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to him brought the shield, the cause of enmitie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Wherewith he goeth to that soveraine Queene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And falling her before on lowly knee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To her makes present of his service scene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, she accepts with thankes and goodly gree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Greatly advauncing his gay chevalree:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So marcheth home, and by her takes the knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom all the people followe with great glee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shouting, and clapping all their hands on hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all the ayre it fills, and flyes to heaven bright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Home is he brought, and layd in sumptous bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where many skilfull leaches him abide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To salve his hurts, that yet still freshly bled.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In wine and oyle they wash his woundes wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And softly gan embalme on everie side:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the while most heavenly melody</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About the bed sweet musicke did divide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him to beguile of griefe and agony;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the while Duessa wept full bitterly.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when a wearie traveiler, that stray es</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By muddy shore of broad seven-mouthed Nile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unweeting of the perillous wandring wayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth meete a cruell craftie Crocodile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, in false griefe hyding his harmefull guile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth weepe full sore, and sheddeth tender teares;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The foolish man, that pities all this while</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mournefull plight, is swallowed up unwares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgetfull of his owne that mindes an others cares.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So wept Duessa untill eventyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shyning lampes in Joves high house were light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then forth she rose, ne lenger would abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But comes unto the place where th'Hethen knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In slombring swownd, nigh voyd of vitall spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lay cover' d with inchaunted cloud all day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when she found, as she him left in plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wayle his wofull case she would not stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to the Easterne coast of heaven makes speedy way:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Where griesly Night, with visage deadly sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Phoebus chearefull face durst never vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in a foule blacke pitchy mantle clad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She findes forth comming from her darksome mew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where she all day did hide her hated hew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before the dore her yron charet stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Already harnessed for journey new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cole blacke steedes yborne of hellish brood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That on their rusty bits did champ as they were wood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who when she saw Duessa, sunny bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adornd with gold and jewels shining cleare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She greatly grew amazed at the sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And th'unacquainted light began to feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For never did such brightnes there appeare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And would have backe retyred to her cave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill the witches speach she gan to heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saying; "Yet, O thou dreaded Dame! I crave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abyde, till I have told the message which I have.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She stayd; and foorth Duessa gan proceede:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"O! thou most auncient Grandmother of all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More old then Jove, whom thou at first didst breede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that great house of Gods caslestiall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which wast begot in Dasmogorgons hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sawst the secrets of the world unmade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why suffredst thou thy Nephewes deare to fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Elfin sword most shamefully betrade?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo! where the stout Sansjoy doth sleepe in deadly shade.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And him before, I saw with bitter eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bold Sansfoy shrinck underneath his speare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now the pray of fowles in field he lyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor wayld of friends, nor layd on groning beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That whylome was to me too dearely deare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O! what of gods then boots it to be borne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If old Aveugles sonnes so evill heare?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or who shall not great Nightes children scorne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When two of three her Nephewes are so fowle forlorne?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Up, then! up, dreary Dame, of darknes Queene!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Go, gather up the reliques of thy race;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or else goe them avenge, and let be scene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That dreaded Night in brightest day hath place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And can the children of fayre light deface."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her feeling speaches some compassion mov'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hart, and chaunge in that great mothers face:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet pitty in her hart was never prov'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till then, for evermore she hated, never lov'd:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And said, "Deare daughter, rightly may I rew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fall of famous children borne of mee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And good successes which their foes ensew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But who can turne the stream of destinee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or breake the chayne of strong necessitee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which fast is tyde to Joves eternall seat?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sonnes of Day he favoureth, I see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by my ruines thinkes to make them great:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make one great by others losse is bad excheat.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Yet shall they not escape so freely all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For some shall pay the price of others guilt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he the man that made Sansfoy to fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall with his owne blood price that he hath spilt.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But what art thou, that telst of Nephews kilt?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"I, that do seeme not I, Duessa ame,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quoth she, "how ever now, in garments gilt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gorgeous gold arayd, I to thee came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Duessa I, the daughter of Deceipt and Shame."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then, bowing downe her aged backe, she kist</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wicked witch, saying, "In that fayre face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The false resemblaunce of Deceipt, I wist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did closely lurke; yet so true-seeming grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It carried, that I scarse in darksome place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could it discerne, though I the mother bee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of falshood, and roote of Duessaes race.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O welcome, child! whom I have longd to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now have scene unwares. Lo! now I goe with thee."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then to her yron wagon she betakes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with her beares the fowle welfavourd witch.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through mirkesome aire her ready way she makes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her twyfold Teme, of which two blacke as pitch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And two were browne, yet each to each unlich,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did softly swim away, ne ever stamp</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unlesse she chaunst their stubborne mouths to twitch;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, foming tarre, their bridles they would champ,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And trampling the fine element would fiercely ramp.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So well they sped, that they be come at length</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the place whereas the Paynim lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Devoid of outward sence and native strength,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Coverd with charmed cloud from vew of day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sight of men, since his late luckelesse fray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His cruell wounds, with cruddy bloud congeald,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They binden up so wisely as they may,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And handle softly, till they can be heald:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So lay him in her charett, close in night conceald.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, all the while she stood upon the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wakefull dogs did never cease to bay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As giving warning of th'unwonted sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which her yron wheeles did them affray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her darke griesly looke them much dismay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The messenger of death, the ghastly owle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With drery shriekes did also her bewray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hungry wolves continually did howle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At her abhorred face, so filthy and so fowle.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thence turning backe in silence softe they stole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And brought the heavy corse with easy pace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To yawning gulfe of deepe Avernus hole.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By that same hole an entraunce, darke and bace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With smoake and sulphur hiding all the place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Descends to hell: there creature never past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That backe retourned without heavenly grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But dreadfull Furies, which their chaines have brast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And damned sprights sent forth to make ill men aghast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By that same way the direfull dames doe drive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their mournefull charett, fild with rusty blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And downe to Plutoes house are come bilive:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which passing through, on every side them stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The trembling ghosts with sad amazed mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Chattring their iron teeth, and staring wide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With stony eies; and all the hellish brood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of feends infernall flockt on every side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To gaze on erthly wight that with the Night durst ride.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They pas the bitter waves of Acheron,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where many soules sit wailing woefully,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And come to fiery flood of Phlegeton,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereas the damned ghosts in torments fry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with sharp shrilling shriekes doe bootlesse cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cursing high Jove, the which them thither sent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The house of endlesse paine is built thereby,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which ten thousand sorts of punishment</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cursed creatures doe eternally torment.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Before the threshold dreadfull Cerberus</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His three deformed heads did lay along,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Curled with thousand adders venemous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lilled forth his bloody flaming tong:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At them he gan to reare his bristles strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And felly gnarre, untill Dayes enemy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did him appease; then downe his taile he hong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And suffered them to passen quietly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For she in hell and heaven had power equally.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There was Ixion turned on a wheele,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For daring tempt the Queene of heaven to sin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Sisyphus an huge round stone did reele</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against an hill, ne might from labour lin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There thristy Tantalus hong by the chin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Tityus fed a vultur on his maw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Typhoeus joynts were stretched on a gin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Theseus condemned to endlesse slouth by law;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fifty sisters water in leke vessels draw.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They all, beholding worldly wights in place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Leave off their worke, unmindfull of their smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To gaze on them; who forth by them doe pace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till they be come unto the furthest part;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where was a Cave ywrought by wondrous art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deepe, darke, uneasy, dolefull, comfortlesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which sad Aesculapius far apart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emprisond was in chaines remedilesse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that Hippolytus rent corse he did redresse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hippolytus a jolly huntsman was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That wont in charett chace the foming bore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He all his Peeres in beauty did surpas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Ladies love as losse of time forbore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His wanton stepdame loved him the more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when she saw her offred sweets refusd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her love she turnd to hate, and him before</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His father fierce of treason false accusd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with her gealous termes his open eares abusd:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who, all in rage, his Sea-god syre besought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some cursed vengeaunce on his sonne to cast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From surging gulf two Monsters streight were brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With dread whereof his chacing steedes aghast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both charett swifte and huntsman overcast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His goodly corps, on ragged cliffs yrent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was quite dismembred, and his members chast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Scattered on every mountaine as he went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That of Hippolytus was lefte no moniment.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His cruell step-dame, seeing what was donne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her wicked daies with wretched knife did end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In death avowing th'innocence of her sonne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which hearing, his rash syre began to rend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His heare, and hasty tong that did offend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, gathering up the reliques of his smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By Dianes meanes, who was Hippolyts frend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them brought to Aesculape, that by his art</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did heale them all againe., and joyned every part.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such wondrous science in mans witt to rain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When Jove avizd, that could the dead revive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fates expired could renew again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of endlesse life he might him not deprive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But unto hell did thrust him downe alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With flashing thunderbolt y wounded sore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where, long remaining, he did alwaies strive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himselfe with salves to health for to restore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And slake the heavenly fire that raged evermore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There auncient Night arriving did alight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From her nigh weary wayne, and in her armes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Aesculapius brought the wounded knight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whome having softly disaraid of armes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho gan to him discover all his harmes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beseeching him with prayer and with praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If either salves, or oyles, or herbes, or charmes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A fordonne wight from dore of death mote raise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would at her request prolong her nephews daies.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ah Dame," (quoth he) "thou temptest me in vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To dare the thing, which daily yet I rew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the old cause of my continued paine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With like attempt to like end to renew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is not enough, that, thrust from heaven dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here endlesse penaunce for one fault I pay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that redoubled crime with vengeaunce new</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou biddest me to eeke? Can Night defray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wrath of thundring Jove, that rules both night and day?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Not so," (quoth she) "but, sith that heavens king</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From hope of heaven hath thee excluded quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why fearest thou, that canst not hope for thing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fearest not that more thee hurten might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now in the powre of everlasting Night?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Goe to then, O thou far renowmed sonne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of great Apollo! shew thy famous might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In medicine, that els hath to thee wonne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great pains, and greater praise, both never to be donne.'</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her words prevaild: And then the learned leach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His cunning hand gan to his wounds to lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all things els the which his art did teach:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which having scene, from thence arose away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The mother of dredd darknesse, and let stay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Aveugles sonne there in the leaches cure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, backe retourning, took her wonted way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To ronne her timely race, whilst Phoebus pure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In westerne waves his weary wagon did recure.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The false Duessa, leaving noyous Night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Returnd to stately pallace of Dame Pryde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where when she came, she found the Faery knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Departed thence; albee his woundes wyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not throughly heald unready were to ryde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Good cause he had to hasten thence away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For on a day his wary Dwarfe had spyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where in a dungeon deepe huge nombers lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of caytive wretched thralls, that wayled night and day:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A ruefull sight as could be scene with eie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whom he learned had in secret wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hidden cause of their captivitie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How mortgaging their lives to Covetise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through wastfull Pride and wanton Riotise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They were by law of that proud Tyrannesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Provokt with Wrath and Envyes false surmise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Condemned to that Dongeon mercilesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where they should live in wo, and dye in wretchednesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There was that great proud king of Babylon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That would compell all nations to adore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him as onely God to call upon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till, through celestiall doome thrown out of dore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into an Oxe he was transformd of yore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There also was king Croesus, that enhaunst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His hart too high through his great richesse store;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And proud Antiochus, the which advaunst</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His cursed hand gainst God, and on his altares daunst.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And them long time before, great Nimrod was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That first the world with sword and fire warrayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after him old Ninus far did pas</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In princely pomp, of all the world obayd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There also was that mightie Monarch layd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Low under all, yet above all in pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That name of native syre did fowle upbrayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And would as Ammons sonne be magnifide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till, scornd of God and man, a shamefull death he dide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All these together in one heape were throwne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like carkases of beastes in butchers stall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in another corner wide were strowne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Antique ruins of the Romanes fall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great Romulus, the Grandsyre of them all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proud Tarquin, and too lordly Lentulus;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stout Scipio, and stubborne Hanniball;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ambitious Sylla, and sterne Marius;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High Caesar, great Pompey, and fiers Antonius.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Amongst these mightie men were wemen mixt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proud wemen, vaine, forgetfull of their yoke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bold Semiramis, whose sides transfixt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sonnes own blade her fowle reproches spoke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayre Sthenoboea, that her selfe did choke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With wilfull chord for wanting of her will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">High minded Cleopatra, that with stroke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Aspes sting her selfe did stoutly kill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thousands moe the like that did that dongeon fill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Besides the endlesse routes of wretched thralles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which thither were assembled day by day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From all the world, after their wofull falles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through wicked pride and wasted welthes decay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But most of all, which in that dongeon lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fell from high Princes courtes, or Ladies bowres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where they in ydle pomp, or wanton play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Consumed had their goods and thriftlesse howres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lastly thrown themselves into these heavy stowres.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whose case whenas the careful Dwarfe had tould,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made ensample of their mournfull sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto his Maister, he no lenger would</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There dwell in perill of like painefull plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But earely rose; and, ere that dawning light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Discovered had the world to heaven wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He by a privy Posterne tooke his flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of no envious eyes he mote be spyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, doubtlesse, death ensewd if any him descryde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Scarse could he footing find in that fowle way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For many corses, like a great Lay-stall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of murdred men, which therein strowed lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without remorse or decent funerall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which al through that great Princesse pride did fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And came to shamefull end. And them besyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth ryding underneath the castell wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Donghill of dead carcases he spyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dreadfull spectacle of that sad house of Pryde.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-6" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>From lawlesse lust by wondrous grace</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Fayre Una is releast:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whom salvage nation does adore,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And learnes her wise beheast.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>As when a ship, that flyes fayre under sayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An hidden rocke escaped hath unwares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That lay in waite her wrack for to bewaile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Marriner yet halfe amazed stares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At perill past, and yet in doubt ne dares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To joy at his foolhappie oversight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So doubly is distrest twixt joy and cares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dreadlesse corage of this Elfin knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Having escapt so sad ensamples in his sight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet sad he was, that his too hastie speed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fayre Duess' had forst him leave behind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet more sad, that Una, his deare dreed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her truth had staynd with treason so unkind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet cryme in her could never creature find;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But for his love, and for her own selfe sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She wandred had from one to other Ynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him for to seeke, ne ever would forsake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till her unwares the fiers Sansloy did overtake:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who, after Archimagoes fowle defeat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Led her away into a forest wilde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, turning wrathfull fyre to lustfull heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With beastly sin thought her to have defilde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made the vassall of his pleasures vilde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet first he cast by treatie, and by traynes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her to persuade that stubborne fort to yilde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For greater conquest of hard love he gaynes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That workes it to his will, then he that it constraines.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With fawning wordes he courted her a while;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, looking lovely and oft sighing sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her constant hart did tempt with diverse guile.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wordes, and lookes, and sighes she did abhore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As rock of Diamond stedfast evermore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet for to feed his fyrie lustfull eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He snatcht the vele that hong her face before:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan her beautie shyne as brightest skye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And burnt his beastly hart t'efforce her chastitye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So when he saw his flatt'ring artes to fayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And subtile engines bett from batteree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With greedy force he gan the fort assayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof he weend possessed soone to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And win rich spoile of ransackt chastitee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah heavens! that doe this hideous act behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heavenly virgin thus outraged see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How can ye vengeance just so long withhold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hurle not flashing flames upon that Paynim bold?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The pitteous mayden, carefull, comfortlesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Does throw out thrilling shriekes, and shrieking cryes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The last vaine helpe of wemens great distresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with loud plaintes importuneth the skyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That molten starres doe drop like weeping eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Phoebus, flying so most shamefull sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His blushing face in foggy cloud implyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hydes for shame. What witt of mortal wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can now devise to quitt a thrall from such a plight?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eternall providence, exceeding thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where none appeares can make her selfe a way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A wondrous way it for this Lady wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From Lyons clawes to pluck the gryped pray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her shrill outcryes and shrieks so loud did bray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the woodes and forestes did resownd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A troupe of Faunes and Satyres far away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within the wood were dauncing in a rownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whiles old Sylvanus slept in shady arber sownd:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who, when they heard that pitteous strained voice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In haste forsooke their rurall meriment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ran towardes the far rebownded noyce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet what wight so loudly did lament.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the place they come incontinent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when the raging Sarazin espyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A rude, mishapen, monstrous rablement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose like he never saw, he durst not byde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But got his ready steed, and fast away gan ryde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The wyld woodgods, arrived in the place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There find the virgin, doolfull, desolate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With ruffled rayments, and fayre blubbred face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As her outrageous foe had left her late;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And trembling yet through feare of former hate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All stand amazed at so uncouth sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gin to pittie her unhappie state:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All stand astonied at her beautie bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In their rude eyes unworthie of so wofull plight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She, more amazd, in double dread doth dwell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every tender part for feare does shake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As when a greedy Wolfe, through honger fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A seely Lamb far from the flock does take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whom he meanes his bloody feast to make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Lyon spyes fast running towards him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The innocent pray in hast he does forsake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, quitt from death, yet quakes in every lim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With chaunge of feare, to see the Lyon looke so grim.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such fearefull fitt assaid her trembling hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne word to speake, ne joynt to move, she had;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The salvage nation feele her secret smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And read her sorrow in her count'nance sad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their frowning forheades, with rough homes yclad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rustick horror, all asyde doe lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, gently grenning, shew a semblance glad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To comfort her; and, feare to put away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their backward bent knees teach her humbly to obay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The doubtfull Damzell dare not yet committ</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her single person to their barbarous truth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But still twixt feare and hope amazd does sitt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Late learnd what harme to hasty trust ensu'th.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They, in compassion of her tender youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wonder of her beautie soverayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are wonne with pitty and unwonted ruth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, all prostrate upon the lowly playne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doe kisse her feete, and fawne on her with count'nance fayne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Their harts she ghesseth by their humble guise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yieldes her to extremitie of time:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So from the ground she fearelesse doth arise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And walketh forth without suspect of crime.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They, all as glad as birdes of joyous Pryme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence lead her forth, about her dauncing round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shouting, and singing all a shepheards ryme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with greene braunches strewing all the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do worship her as Queene with olive girlond cround.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And all the way their merry pipes they sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the woods with doubled Eccho ring;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with their horned feet doe weare the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Leaping like wanton kids in pleasant Spring.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So towards old Sylvanus they her bring;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, with the noyse awaked, commeth out</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet the cause, his weake steps governing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And aged limbs on cypresse stadle stout;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with an yvie twyne his waste is girt about.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Far off he wonders what them makes so glad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or Bacchus merry fruit they did invent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or Cybeles franticke rites have made them mad:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They, drawing nigh, unto their God present</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That flowre of fayth and beautie excellent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The God himselfe, vewing that mirrhour rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stood long amazd, and burnt in his intent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His owne fayre Dryope now he thinkes not faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Pholoe fowle, when her to this he doth compaire,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The woodborne people fall before her flat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And worship her as Goddesse of the wood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And old Sylvanus selfe bethinkes not what</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To thinke of wight so fayre, but gazing stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In doubt to deeme her borne of earthly brood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes dame Venus selfe he seemes to see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Venus never had so sober mood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes Diana he her takes to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But misseth bow and shaftes, and buskins to her knee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By vew of her he ginneth to revive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His ancient love, and dearest Cyparisse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And calles to mind his pourtraiture alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How fayre he was, and yet not fayre to this;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And how he slew with glauncing dart amisse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A gentle Hynd, the which the lovely boy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did love as life, above all worldly blisse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For griefe whereof the lad n'ould after joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But pynd away in anguish and selfe-wild annoy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The wooddy nymphes, faire Hamadryades,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her to behold do thither runne apace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the troupe of light-foot Naiades</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flocke all about to see her lovely face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when they vewed have her heavenly grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They envy her in their malitious mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fly away for feare of fowle disgrace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all the Satyres scorne their woody kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And henceforth nothing faire but her on earth they find.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Glad of such lucke, the luckelesse lucky mayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did her content to please their feeble eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And long time with that salvage people stayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To gather breath in many miseryes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">During which time her gentle wit she plyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To teach them truth, which worshipt her in vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made her th'Image of Idolatryes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when their bootlesse zeale she did restrayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From her own worship, they her Asse would worship fayn.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It fortuned, a noble warlike knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By just occasion to that forrest came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke his kindred, and the lignage right</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whence he tooke his weldeserved name:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He had in armes abroad wonne muchell fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fild far landes with glorie of his might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Plaine, faithfull, true, and enimy of shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever lov'd to fight for Ladies right;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in vaine glorious frayes he litle did delight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A Satyres sonne, yborne in forrest wyld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By straunge adventure as it did betyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there begotten of a Lady myld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayre Thyamis, the daughter of Labryde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was in sacred bandes of wedlocke tyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Therion, a loose unruly swayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who had more joy to raunge the forrest wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chase the salvage beast with busie payne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then serve his Ladies love, and waste in pleasures vayne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The forlorne mayd did with loves longing burne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And could not lacke her lovers company;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to the woods she goes, to serve her turne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seeke her spouse that from her still does fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And followes other game and venery:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Satyre chaunst her wandring for to finde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, kindling coles of lust in brutish eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The loyall linkes of wedlocke did unbinde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made her person thrall unto his beastly kind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So long in secret cabin there he held</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her captive to his sensuall desyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that with timely fruit her belly sweld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bore a boy unto that salvage syre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then home he suffred her for to retyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ransome leaving him the late-borne childe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom, till to ryper yeares he gan aspyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He nousled up in life and manners wilde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Emongst wild beastes and woods, from lawes of men exilde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For all he taught the tender ymp was but</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To banish cowardize and bastard feare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His trembling hand he would him force to put</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the Lyon and the rugged Beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from the she Beares teats her whelps to teare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke wyld roring Buls he would him make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tame, and ryde their backes, not made to beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the Robuckes in flight to overtake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That everie beast for feare of him did fly, and quake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereby so fearlesse and so fell he grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That his own syre, and maister of his guise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did often tremble at his horrid vew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oft, for dread of hurt, would him advise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The angry beastes not rashly to despise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor too much to provoke; for he would learne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Lyon stoup to him in lowly wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(A lesson hard) and make the Libbard sterne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leave roaring, when in rage he for revenge did earne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And for to make his powre approved more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wyld beastes in yron yokes he would compell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The spotted Panther, and the tusked Bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Pardale swift, and the Tigre cruell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Antelope, and Wolfe both fiers and fell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And them constraine in equall teme to draw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such joy he had their stubborne harts to quell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sturdie courage tame with dreadfull aw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That his beheast they feared as a tyrans law.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His loving mother came upon a day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the woodes, to see her little sonne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chaunst unwares to meet him in the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After his sportes and cruell pastime donne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When after him a Lyonesse did runne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That roaring all with rage did lowd requere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her children deare, whom he away had wonne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Lyon whelpes she saw how he did beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lull in rugged armes withouten childish feare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The fearefull Dame all quaked at the sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And turning backe gan fast to fly away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill, with love revokt from vaine affright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She hardly yet perswaded was to stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then to him these womanish words gan say:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ah Satyrane, my dearling and my joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For love of me leave off this dreadfull play;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To dally thus with death is no fit toy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go, find some other play-fellowes, mine own sweet boy."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In these and like delightes of bloody game</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He trayned was, till ryper years he raught;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there abode, whylst any beast of name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Walkt in that forrest, whom he had not taught</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To feare his force: and then his courage haught</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Desyrd of forreine foemen to be knowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And far abroad for straunge adventures sought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which his might was never overthrowne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But through al Faery lond his famous worth was blown.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet evermore it was his maner faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After long labours and adventures spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto those native woods for to repaire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see his syre and ofspring auncient.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now he thither came for like intent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where he unwares the fairest Una found;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Straunge Lady in so straunge habiliment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Teaching the Satyres, which her sat around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trew sacred lore, which from her sweet lips did redound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He wondred at her wisedome hevenly rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose like in womens witt he never knew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, when her curteous deeds he did compare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan her admire, and her sad sorrowes rew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blaming of Fortune, which such troubles threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And joyd to make proofe of her cruelty</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On gentle Dame, so hurtlesse and so trew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thenceforth he kept her goodly company,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And learnd her discipline of faith and verity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But she, all vowd unto the Redcrosse Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His wandring perill closely did lament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne in this new acquaintaunce could delight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But her deare heart with anguish did torment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arid all her witt in secret counsels spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How to escape. At last in privy wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Satyrane she shewed her intent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, glad to gain such favour, gan devise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How with that pensive Maid he best might thence arise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So on a day, when Satyres all were gone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To do their service to Sylvanus old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gentle virgin, left behinde alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He led away with corage stout and bold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Too late it was to Satyres to be told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ever hope recover her againe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In vaine he seekes that having cannot hold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So fast he carried her with carefull paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they the woods are past, and come now to the plaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The better part now of the lingring day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They traveild had, whenas they far espide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A weary wight forwandring by the way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And towards him they gan in haste to ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weete of newes that did abroad betide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or tidings of her knight of the Redcrosse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he them spying gan to turne aside</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For feare, as seemd, or for some feigned losse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More greedy they of newes fast towards him do crosse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A silly man, in simple weeds forworne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soild with dust of the long dried way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His sandales were with toilsome travell torne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And face all tand with scorching sunny ray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he had traveild many a sommers day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through boyling sands of Arabic and Ynde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his hand a Jacobs staffe, to stay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His weary limbs upon; and eke behind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His scrip did hang, in which his needments he did bind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The knight, approching nigh, of him inquerd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tidings of warre, and of adventures new;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But warres, nor new adventures, none he herd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Una gan to aske, if ought he knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or heard abroad of that her champion trew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in his armour bare a croslet red?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ay me! Deare dame," (quoth he) "well may I rew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tell the sad sight which mine eies have red;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These eies did see that knight both living and eke ded."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That cruell word her tender hart so thrild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That suddein cold did ronne through every vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stony horrour all her sences fild</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With dying fitt, that downe she fell for paine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The knight her lightly reared up againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And comforted with curteous kind reliefe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, wonne from death, she bad him tellen plaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The further processe of her hidden griefe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lesser pangs can beare who hath endur'd the chief.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then gan the Pilgrim thus: "I chaunst this day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This fatall day that shall I ever rew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see two knights, in travell on my way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(A sory sight) arraung'd in batteill new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both breathing vengeaunce, both of wrathfull hew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My feareful flesh did tremble at their strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see their blades so greedily imbrew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, dronke with blood, yet thristed after life:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What more? the Redcrosse knight was slain with Paynim knife."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ah! dearest Lord," (quoth she) "how might that bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he the stoutest knight that ever wonne?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ah! dearest dame," (quoth hee) "how might I see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The thing that might not be, and yet was donne?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Where is," (said Satyrane) "that Paynims sonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That him of life, and us of joy, hath refte?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Not far away," (quoth he) "he hence doth wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Foreby a fountaine, where I late him lefte</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Washing his bloody wounds, that through the steele were cleft."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith the knight thence marched forth in hast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles Una, with huge heavinesse opprest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could not for sorrow follow him so fast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soone he came, as he the place had ghest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereas that Pagan proud him selfe did rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In secret shadow by a fountaine side:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even he it was, that earst would have supprest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Una; whom when Satyrane espide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With foule reprochfull words he boldly him defide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And said; "Arise, thou cursed Miscreaunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hast with knightlesse guile, and trecherous train,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire knighthood fowly shamed, and doest vaunt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That good knight of the Redcrosse to have slain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arise, and with like treason now maintain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy guilty wrong, or els thee guilty yield."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Sarazin, this hearing, rose amain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, catching up in hast his three-square shield</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shining helmet, soone him buckled to the field.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, drawing: nigh him, said; "Ah! misborn Elfe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In evill houre thy foes thee hither sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Anothers wrongs to wreak upon thy selfe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet ill thou blamest me for having blent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My name with guile and traiterous intent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Redcrosse knight, perdie, I never slew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But had he beene where earst his armes were lent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th'enchaunter vaine his errour should not rew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thou his errour shalt, I hope, now proven trew."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith they gan, both furious and fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To thunder blowes, and fiersly to assaile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each other, bent his enimy to quell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with their force they perst both plate and maile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made wide furrowes in their fleshes fraile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it would pitty any living eie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Large floods of blood adowne their sides did raile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But floods of blood could not them satisfie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both hongred after death; both chose to win, or die.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So long they fight, and full revenge pursue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, fainting, each themselves to breathen lett,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, ofte refreshed, battell oft renue.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As when two Bores, with rancling malice mett,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their gory sides fresh bleeding fiercely frett;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Til breathlesse both themselves aside retire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where foming wrath their cruell tuskes they whett,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And trample th'earth, the whiles they may respire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then backe to fight againe, new breathed and entire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So fiersly, when these knights had breathed once,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They gan to fight retourne, increasing more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their puissant force, and cruell rage attonce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With heaped strokes more hugely then before;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with their drery wounds, and bloody gore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They both, deformed, scarsely could bee known.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By this, sad Una fraught with anguish sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Led with their noise which through the aire was thrown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arriv'd wher they in erth their fruitles blood had sown.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom all so soone as that proud Sarazin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Espide, he gan revive the memory</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his leud lusts, and late attempted sin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lefte the doubtfull battell hastily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To catch her, newly offred to his eie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Satyrane, with strokes him turning, staid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sternely bad him other businesse plie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then hunt the steps of pure unspotted Maid:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherewith he al enrag'd these bitter speaches said.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"O foolish faeries' sonne! what fury mad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath thee incenst to hast thy dolefull fate?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were it not better I that Lady had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then that thou hadst repented it too late?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most sencelesse man he, that himselfe doth hate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To love another: Lo! then, for thine ayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here take thy lovers token on thy pate."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So they to fight; the whiles the royall Mayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fledd farre away, of that proud Paynim sore afrayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But that false Pilgrim, which that leasing told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being in deed old Archimage, did stay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In secret shadow all this to behold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And much rejoyced in their bloody fray:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when he saw the Damsell passe away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He left his stond, and her pursewd apace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hope to bring her to her last decay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But for to tell her lamentable cace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke this battels end, will need another place.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-7" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The Redcrosse knight is captive made</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">By Gyaunt proud apprest:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Prince Arthure meets with Una great</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Ly with those news distrest.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>What man so wise, what earthly witt so ware,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As to discry the crafty cunning traine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which deceipt doth maske in visour faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cast her coulours, died deepe in graine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeme like truth, whose shape she well can faine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fitting gestures to her purpose frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The guiltlesse man with guile to entertaine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great maistresse of her art was that false Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The false Duessa, cloked with Fidessaes name.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who when, returning from the drery Night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She fownd not in that perilous hous of Pryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where she had left the noble Redcrosse knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her hoped pray, she would no lenger byde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But forth she went to seeke him far and wide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere long she fownd, whereas he wearie sate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To reste him selfe foreby a fountaine syde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disarmed all of yron-coted Plate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by his side his steed the grassy forage ate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hee feedes upon the cooling shade, and bayes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His sweatie forehead in the breathing wynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which through the trembling leaves full gently playes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein the chearefull birds of sundry kynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe chaunt sweet musick to delight his mynd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The witch approching gan him fayrely greet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with reproch of carelesnes unkynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upbrayd, for leaving her in place unmeet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With fowle words tempring faire, soure gall with hony sweet.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Unkindnesse past, they gan of solace treat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bathe in pleasaunce of the joyous shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which shielded them against the boyling heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with greene boughes decking a gloomy glade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About the fountaine like a girlond made;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose bubbling wave did ever freshly well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever would through fervent sommer fade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sacred Nymph, which therein wont to dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was out of Dianes favor, as it then befell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The cause was this: one day, when Phoebe fayre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all her band was following the chace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This nymph, quite tyr'd with heat of scorching ayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Satt downe to rest in middest of the race:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The goddesse wroth gan fowly her disgrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And badd the waters, which from her did flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be such as she her selfe was then in place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thenceforth her waters wexed dull and slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all that drinke thereof do faint and feeble grow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hereof this gentle knight imweeting was;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lying downe upon the sandie graile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dronke of the streame, as cleare as christall glas:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones his manly forces gan to fayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mightie strong was turnd to feeble frayle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His chaunged powres at first them selves not felt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till crudled cold his corage gan assayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cheareful blood in fayntnes chill did melt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which like a fever fit through all his bodie swelt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet goodly court he made still to his Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pourd out in loosnesse on the grassy grownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both carelesse of his health, and of his fame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till at the last he heard a dreadfull sownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which through the wood loud bellowing did rebownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the earth for terror seemd to shake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And trees did tremble. Th'Elfe, therewith astownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upstarted lightly from his looser make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his unready weapons gan in hand to take.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But ere he could his armour on him dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or gett his shield, his monstrous enimy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sturdie steps came stalking in his sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An hideous Geaunt, horrible and hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with his tallnesse seemd to threat the skye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The ground eke groned under him for dreed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His living like saw never living eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne durst behold: his stature did exceed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hight of three the tallest sonnes of mortall seed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The greatest Earth his uncouth mother was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And blustring Aeolus his boasted syre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who with his breath, which through the world doth pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her hollow womb did secretly inspyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fild her hidden caves with stormie yre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she conceiv'd; and trebling the dew time</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which the wombes of wemen doe expyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Brought forth this monstrous masse of earthly slyme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Puft up with emptie wynd, and fild with sinfull cryme.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So growen great, through arrogant delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of th'high descent whereof he was yborne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through presumption of his matchlesse might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All other powres and knighthood he did scorne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such now he marcheth to this man forlorne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And left to losse; his stalking steps are stayde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a snaggy Oke, which he had torne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of his mothers bowelles, and it made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His mortall mace, wherewith his foemen he dismayde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That, when the knight he spyde, he gan advaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With huge force and insupportable mayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And towardes him with dreadfull fury praunce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who haplesse, and eke hopelesse, all in vaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did to him pace sad battaile to darrayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disarmd, disgraste, and inwardly dismayde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke so faint in every joynt and vayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through that fraile fountain which him feeble made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That scarsely could he weeld his bootlesse single blade.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Geaunt strooke so maynly mercilesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That could have overthrowne a stony towre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, were not hevenly grace that did him blesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He had beene pouldred all as thin as flowre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he was wary of that deadly stowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lightly lept from underneath the blow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet so exceeding was the villeins powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with the winde it did him overthrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all his sences stound that still he lay full low.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when that divelish yron Engin, wrought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In deepest Hell, and framd by Furies skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With windy Nitre and quick Sulphur fraught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ramd with bollet rownd, ordaind to kill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Conceiveth fyre, the heavens it doth fill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With thundring noyse, and all the ayre doth choke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none can breath, nor see, nor heare at will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through smouldry cloud of duskish stincking smoke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That th'only breath him daunts, who hath escapt the stroke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So daunted when the Geaunt saw the knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His heavie hand he heaved up on hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him to dust thought to have battred quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill Duessa loud to him gan crye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"O great Orgoglio! greatest under skye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O! hold thy mortall hand for Ladies sake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hold for my sake, and doe him not to dye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But vanquisht thine eternall bondslave make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And me, thy worthy meed, unto thy Leman take."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He hearkned, and did stay from further harmes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To gayne so goodly guerdon as she spake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So willingly she came into his armes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who her as willingly to grace did take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And was possessed of his newfound make.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then up he tooke the slombred sencelesse corse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, ere he could out of his swowne awake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him to his castle brought with hastie forse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in a Dongeon deepe him threw without remorse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>From that day forth Duessa was his deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And highly honourd in his haughtie eye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gave her gold and purple pall to weare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And triple crowne set on her head full hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her endowd with royall majesty e.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, for to make her dreaded more of men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And peoples hartes with awfull terror tye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A monstrous beast ybredd in filthy fen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He chose, which he had kept long time in darksom den.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such one it was, as that renowmed Snake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which great Alcides in Stremona slew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long fostred in the filth of Lerna lake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose many heades, out budding ever new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did breed him endlesse labor to subdew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But this same Monster much more ugly was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For seven great heads out of his body grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An yron brest, and back of scaly bras,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all embrewd in blood his eyes did shine as glas.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His tayle was stretched out in wondrous length,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to the hous of hevenly gods it raught:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with extorted powre, and borrow'd strength,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The everburning lamps from thence it braught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And prowdly threw to ground, as things of naught;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And underneath his filthy feet did tread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sacred thinges, and holy heastes foretaught.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon this dreadfull Beast with sevenfold head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sett the false Duessa, for more aw and dread.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The wofull Dwarfe, which saw his maisters fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles he had keeping of his grasing steed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And valiant knight become a caytive thrall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When all was past, tooke up his forlorne weed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mightie Armour, missing most at need;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His silver shield, now idle, maisterlesse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His poynant speare that many made to bleed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rueful moniments of heavinesse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with them all departes to tell his great distresse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He had not travaild long, when on the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He wofull Lady, wofull Una, met,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fast flying from that Paynims greedy pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilest Satyrane him from pursuit did let:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who when her eyes she on the Dwarf had set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saw the signes that deadly tydinges spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She fell to ground for sorrowfull regret,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lively breath her sad brest did forsake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet might her pitteous hart be scene to pant and quake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The messenger of so unhappie newes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would faine have dyde: dead was his hart within,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet outwardly some little comfort shewes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last, recovering hart, he does begin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To rubb her temples, and to chaufe her chin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And everie tender part does tosse and turne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So hardly he the flitted life does win</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto her native prison to retourne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then gins her grieved ghost thus to lament and mourne:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ye dreary instruments of dolefull sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That doe this deadly speclacle behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why doe ye lenger feed on loathed light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or liking find to gaze on earthly mould,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith cruell fates the carefull threds unfould,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which my life and love together tyde?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now let the stony dart of sencelesse cold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perce to my hart, and pas through everie side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let eternall night so sad sight fro me hyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"O lightsome day! the lampe of highest Jove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First made by him mens wandring wayes to guyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When darknesse he in deepest dongeon drove;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Henceforth thy hated face for ever hyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shut up heavens windowes shyning wyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For earthly sight can nought but sorrow breed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And late repentance which shall long abyde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mine eyes no more on vanitie shall feed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But seeled up with death shall have their deadly meed."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then downe againe she fell unto the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he her quickly reared up againe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrise did she sinke adowne in deadly swownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thrise he her reviv'd with busie paine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last when life recover'd had the raine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And over-wrestled his strong enimy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With foltring tong, and trembling everie vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Tell on," (quoth she) "the wofull Tragedy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which these reliques sad present unto mine eye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Tempestuous fortune hath spent all her spight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thrilling sorrow throwne his utmost dart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy sad tong cannot tell more heavy plight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then that I feele, and harbour in mine hart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who hath endur'd the whole can beare ech part.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If death it be, it is not the first wound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That launched hath my brest with bleeding smart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Begin, and end the bitter balefull stound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If lesse then that I feare, more favour I have found."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then gan the Dwarfe the whole discourse declare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The subtile traines of Archimago old;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wanton loves of false Fidessa fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bought with the blood of vanquisht Paynim bold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wretched payre transformd to treen mould;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The house of Pryde, and perilles round about;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The combat which he with Sansjoy did hould;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The lucklesse conflict with the Gyaunt stout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein captiv'd, of life or death he stood in doubt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She heard with patience all unto the end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strove to maister sorrowfull assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which greater grew the more she did contend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And almost rent her tender hart in tway;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And love fresh coles unto her fire did lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For greater love, the greater is the losse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was never Lady loved dearer day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then she did love the knight of the Redcrosse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For whose deare sake so many troubles her did tosse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last when fervent sorrow slaked was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She up arose, resolving him to find</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alive or dead; and forward forth doth pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All as the Dwarfe the way to her assynd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evermore, in constant carefull mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She fedd her wound with fresh renewed bale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long tost with stormes, and bet with bitter wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">High over hills, and lowe adowne the dale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She wandred many a wood, and measurd many a vale.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last she chaunced by good hap to meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A goodly knight, faire marching by the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Together with his Squyre, arayed meet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His glitterand armour shined far away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like glauncing light of Phoebus brightest ray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From top to toe no place appeared bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That deadly dint of steele endanger may.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Athwart his brest a bauldrick brave he ware,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That shind, like twinkling stars, with stones most pretious rare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And in the midst thereof one pretious stone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of wondrous worth, and eke of wondrous mights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shapt like a Ladies head, exceeding shone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like Hesperus emongst the lesser lights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strove for to amaze the weaker sights:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereby his mortall blade full comely hong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In yvory sheath, ycarv'd with curious slights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose hilts were burnisht gold, and handle strong</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mother perle; and buckled with a golden tong.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His haughtie Helmet, horrid all with gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both glorious brightnesse and great terrour bredd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all the crest a Dragon did enfold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With greedie pawes, and over all did spredd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His golden winges: his dreadfull hideous hedd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Close couched on the bever, seemd to throw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From flaming mouth bright sparckles fiery redd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That suddeine horrour to faint hartes did show;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And scaly tayle was stretcht adowne his back full low.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Upon the top of all his loftie crest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A bounch of heares discolourd diversly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sprincled pearle and gold full richly drest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did shake, and seemd to daunce for jollity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to an almond tree ymounted hye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On top of greene Selinis all alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With blossoms brave bedecked daintily;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose tender locks do tremble every one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At everie little breath that under heaven is blowne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His warlike shield all closely cover'd was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne might of mortall eye be ever scene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not made of steele, nor of enduring bras,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such earthly mettals soon consumed beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all of Diamond perfect pure and cleene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It framed was, one massy entire mould,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hewen out of Adamant rocke with engines keene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That point of speare it never percen could,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne dint of direfull sword divide the substance would.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The same to wight he never wont disclose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But whenas monsters huge he would dismay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or daunt unequall armies of his foes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or when the flying heavens he would affray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For so exceeding shone his glistring ray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Phoebus golden face it did attaint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As when a cloud his beames doth over-lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And silver Cynthia wexed pale and faynt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when her face is staynd with magicke arts constraint.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>No magicke arts hereof had any might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor bloody wordes of bold Enchaunters call;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all that was not such as seemd in sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before that shield did fade, and suddeine fall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when him list the raskall routes appall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Men into stones therewith he could transmew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stones to dust, and dust to nought at all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, when him list the prouder lookes subdew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would them gazing blind, or turne to other hew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne let it seeme that credence this exceedes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he that made the same was knowne right well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To have done much more admirable deedes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It Merlin was, which whylome did excell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All living wightes in might of magicke spell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both shield and sword, and armour all he wrought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For this young Prince, when first to armes he fell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when he dyde, the Faery Queene it brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Faerie lond, where yet it may be scene, if sought:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A gentle youth, his dearely loved Squire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His speare of heben wood behind him bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose harmeful head, thrise heated in the fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had riven many a brest with pikehead square:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A goodly person, and could menage faire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His stubborne steed with curbed canon bitt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who under him did trample as the aire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chauft that any on his backe should sitt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The yron rowels into frothy fome he bitt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whenas this knight nigh to the Lady drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With lovely court he gan her entertaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when he heard her answers loth, he knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some secret sorrow did her heart distraine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to allay, and calme her storming paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire feeling words he wisely gan display,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for her humor fitting purpose faine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tempt the cause it selfe for to bewray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherewith enmovd, these bleeding words she gan to say.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"What worlds delight, or joy of living speach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can hart, so plungd in sea of sorrowes deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heaped with so huge misfortunes, reach?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The carefull cold beginneth for to creep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in my heart his yron arrow steep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone as I thinke upon my bitter bale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such helplesse harmes yts better hidden keep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then rip up griefe where it may not availe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My last left comfort is my woes to weepe and waile."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ah Lady deare," quoth then the gentle knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Well may I ween your griefe is wondrous great;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For wondrous great griefe groneth in my spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles thus I heare you of your sorrowes treat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, woefull Lady, let me you intrete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For to unfold the anguish of your hart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mishaps are maistred by advice discrete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And counsell mitigates the greatest smart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Found never help who never would his hurts impart."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"O, but," (quoth she) "great griefe will not be tould,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And can more easily be thought then said."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Right so," (quoth he) "but he that never would</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could never: will to might gives greatest aid."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"But griefe," (quoth she) "does greater grow displaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If then it find not helpe, and breeds despaire."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Despaire breeds not," (quoth he) "where faith is staid."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"No faith so fast," (quoth she) "but flesh does paire."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Flesh may empaire," (quoth he) "but reason can repaire."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His goodly reason, and well-guided speach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So deepe did settle in her gracious thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her perswaded to disclose the breach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which love and fortune in her heart had wrought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said; "Faire Sir, I hope good hap hath brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You to inquere the secrets of my griefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that your wisedome will direct my thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that your prowesse can me yield reliefe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, heare the story sad, which I shall tell you briefe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"The forlorne Maiden, whom your eies have scene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The laughing stocke of fortunes mockeries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Am th'onely daughter of a King and Queene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose parents deare, whiles equal destinies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did ronne about, and their felicities</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The favourable heavens did not envy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did spred their rule through all the territories,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Phison and Euphrates floweth by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Gehons golden waves doe wash continually:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Till that their cruell cursed enemy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An huge great Dragon, horrible in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bred in the loathly lakes of Tartary,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With murdrous ravine, and devouring might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their kingdome spoild, and countrey wasted quight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Themselves, for feare into his jawes to fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He forst to castle strong to take their flight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where, fast embard in mighty brasen wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He has them now fowr years besiegd to make them thrall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Full many knights, adventurous and stout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have enterpriz'd that Monster to subdew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From every coast that heaven walks about</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have thither come the noble Martial crew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That famous harde atchievements still pursew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet never any could that girlond win,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all still shronke, and still he greater grew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All they, for want of faith, or guilt of sin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pitteous pray of his fiers cruelty have bin.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"At last, yled with far reported praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which flying fame throughout the world had spred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of doughty knights, whom Faery land did raise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That noble order hight of maidenhed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forthwith to court of Gloriane I sped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Gloriane, great Queene of glory bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose kingdomes seat Cleopolis is red;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There to obtaine some such redoubted knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Parents deare from tyrants powre deliver might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Yt was my chaunce (my chaunce was faire and good)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There for to find a fresh unproved knight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose manly hands imbrewd in guilty blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had never beene, ne ever by his might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had throwne to ground the unregarded right:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet of his prowesse proofe he since hath made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(I witnes am) in many a cruell fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The groning ghosts of many one dismaide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have felt the bitter dint of his avenging blade.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And ye, the forlorne reliques of his powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His biting sword, and his devouring speare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which have endured many a dreadfull-stowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can speake his prowesse that did earst you beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And well could rule; now he hath left you heare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be the record of his ruefull losse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of my dolefull disaventurous deare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O! heavie record of the good Red Crosse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where have yee left your lord that could so well you tosse?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Well hoped I, and faire beginnings had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he my captive languor should redeeme:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till, all unweeting, an Enchaunter bad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His sence abusd, and made him to misdeeme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My loyalty, not such as it did seeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That rather death desire then such despight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be judge, ye heavens, that all things right esteeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How I him lov'd, and love with all my might.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So thought I eke of him, and think I thought aright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Thenceforth me desolate he quite forsooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wander where wilde fortune would me lead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And other bywaies he himselfe betooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where never foote of living wight did tread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That brought not backe the balefull body dead:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which him chaunced false Duessa meete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mine onely foe, mine onely deadly dread;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who with her witchcraft, and misseeming sweete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inveigled him to follow her desires unmeete.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"At last, by subtile sleights she him betraid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto his foe, a Gyaunt huge and tall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who him disarmed, dissolute, dismaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unwares surprised, and with mighty mall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The monster mercilesse him made to fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose fall did never foe before behold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now in darkesome dungeon, wretched thrall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Remedilesse for aie he doth him hold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is my cause of griefe, more great then may be told."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ere she had ended all she gan to faint:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he her comforted, and faire bespake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Certes, Madame, ye have great cause of plaint;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That stoutest heart, I weene, could cause to quake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But be of cheare, and comfort to you take;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For till I have acquitt your captive knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Assure your selfe I will you not forsake."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His chearefull words reviv'd her chearelesse spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So forth they went, the Dwarfe them guiding ever right.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-8" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Faire virgin to redeem her deare,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Brings Arthur to the fight:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who slays the Gyaunt, wounds the beast,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And strips Duessa' guight</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Ay me! how many perils doe enfold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The righteous man, to make him daily fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were not that heavenly grace doth him uphold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stedfast truth acquite him out of all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her love is firme, her care continuall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So oft as he, through his own foolish pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or weaknes, is to sinfull bands made thrall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Els should this Redcrosse knight in bands have dyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For whose deliverance she this Prince doth thither guyd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They sadly traveild thus, untill they came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nigh to a castle builded strong and hye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then cryde the Dwarfe, "Lo! yonder is the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which my Lord, my liege, doth lucklesse ly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrall to that Gyaunts hatefull tyranny:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore, deare Sir, your mightie powres assay."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The noble knight alighted by and by</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From loftie steed, and badd the Ladie stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see what end of fight should him befall that day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So with his Squire, th'admirer of his might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He marched forth towardes that castle wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose gates he fownd fast shutt, ne living wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To warde the same, nor answere commers call.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then tooke that Squire an home of bugle small,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which hong adowne his side in twisted gold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tasselles gay. Wyde wonders over all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that same homes great virtues weren told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which had approved bene in uses manifold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Was never wight that heard that shrilling sownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But trembling feare did feel in every vaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Three miles it might be easy heard arownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Ecchoes three aunswer'd it selfe againe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No false enchauntment, nor deceiptfull traine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might once abide the terror of that blast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But presently was void' and wholly vaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No gate so strong, no locke so firme and fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But with that percing noise flew open quite, or brast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The same before the Geaunts gate he blew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the castle quaked from the grownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every dore of freewill open flew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Gyaunt selfe, dismaied with that sownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where he with his Duessa dalliaunce fownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hast came rushing forth from inner bowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With staring countenance sterne, as one astownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And staggering steps, to weet what suddein stowre</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had wrought that horror strange, and dar'd his dreaded powre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And after him the proud Duessa came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">High mounted on her many headed beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every head with fyrie tongue did flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every head was crowned on his creast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bloody mouthed with late cruell feast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That when the knight beheld, his mightie shild</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his manly arme he soone addrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at him fiersly flew, with corage fild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eger greedinesse through every member thrild.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith the Gyant buckled him to fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Inflamd with scornefull wrath and high disdaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lifting up his dreadfull club on hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All armd with ragged snubbes and knottie graine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him thought at first encounter to have slaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wise and wary was that noble Pere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, lightly leaping from so monstrous maine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did fayre avoide the violence him nere:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It booted nought to thinke such thunderbolts to beare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne shame he thought to shonne so hideous might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The ydle stroke, enforcing furious way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Missing the marke of his misaymed sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did fall to ground, and with his heavy sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So deepely dinted in the driven clay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That three yardes deepe a furrow up did throw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sad earth, wounded with so sore assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did grone full grievous underneath the blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And trembling with strange feare did like an erthquake show.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when almightie Jove, in wrathfull mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wreake the guilt of mortall sins is bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hurles forth his thundring dart with deadly food</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enrold in flames, and smouldring dreriment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through riven cloudes and molten firmament;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fiers threeforked engin, making way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both loftie towres and highest trees hath rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all that might his angry passage stay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, shooting in the earth, castes up a mount of clay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His boystrous club, so buried in the grownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He could not rearen up againe so light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that the Knight him at advantage fownd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, whiles he strove his combred clubbe to quight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the earth, with blade all burning bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He smott off his left arme, which like a block</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did fall to ground, depriv'd of native might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Large streames of blood out of the truncked stock</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forth gushed, like fresh water streame from riven rocke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Dismayed with so desperate deadly wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke impatient of unwonted payne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He loudly brayd with beastly yelling sownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the fieldes rebellowed againe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As great a noyse, as when in Cymbrian plaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An heard of Bulles, whom kindly rage doth sting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe for the milky mothers want complaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fill the fieldes with troublous bellowing:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The neighbor woods arownd with hollow murmur ring.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That when his deare Duessa heard, and saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The evil stownd that daungerd her estate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto his aide she hastily did draw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her dreadfull beast; who, swolne with blood of late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came ramping forth with proud presumpteous gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And threatned all his heades like flaming brandes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But him the Squire made quickly to retrate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Encountring fiers with single sword in hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And twixt him and his Lord did like a bulwarke stand.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The proud Duessa, full of wrathfull spight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fiers disdaine to be affronted so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enforst her purple beast with all her might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That stop out of the way to overthroe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Scorning the let of so unequall foe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But nathemore would that corageous swayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To her yeeld passage gainst his Lord to goe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with outrageous strokes did him restraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with his body bard the way atwixt them twaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then tooke the angrie witch her golden cup,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which still she bore, replete with magick artes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Death and despeyre did many thereof sup,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And secret poyson through their inner partes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th'eternall bale of heavie wounded harts:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, after charmes and some enchauntments said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She lightly sprinkled on his weaker partes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith his sturdie corage soon was quayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all his sences were with suddein dread dismayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So downe he fell before the cruell beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who on his neck his bloody clawes did seize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That life nigh crusht out of his panting brest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No powre he had to stirre, nor will to rize.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That when the carefull knight gan well avise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He lightly left the foe with whom he fought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the beast gan turne his enterprise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For wondrous anguish in his hart it wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see his loved Squyre into such thraldom brought:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, high advauncing his blood-thirstie blade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stroke one of those deformed heades so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of his puissaunce proud ensample made:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His monstrous scalpe downe to his teeth it tore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that misformed shape misshaped more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A sea of blood gusht from the gaping wownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her gay garments staynd with filthy gore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And overflowed all the field arownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That over shoes in blood he waded on the grownd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereat he rored for exceeding paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to have heard great horror would have bred;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And scourging th'emptie ayre with his long trayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through great impatience of his grieved hed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His gorgeous ryder from her loftie sted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would have cast downe, and trodd in durty myre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had not the Gyaunt soone her succoured;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, all enrag'd with smart and frantick yre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came hurtling in full fiers, and forst the knight retyre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The force, which wont in two to be disperst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In one alone left hand he now unites,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which is through rage more strong then both were erst;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which his hideous club aloft he dites,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at his foe with furious rigor smites,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That strongest Oake might seeme to overthrow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The stroke upon his shield so heavie lites,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to the ground it doubleth him full low:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What mortall wight could ever beare so monstrous blow?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And in his fall his shield, that covered was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did loose his vele by chaunce, and open flew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The light whereof, that hevens light did pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such blazing brightnesse through the ayer threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That eye mote not the same endure to vew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when the Gyaunt spyde with staring eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He downe let fall his arme, and soft withdrew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His weapon huge, that heaved was on hye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For to have slain the man, that on the ground did lye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And eke the fruitfull-headed beast, amazd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At flashing beames of that sunshiny shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Became stark blind, and all his sences dazd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That downe he tumbled on the durtie field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seemd himselfe as conquered to yield.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when his maistresse proud perceiv'd to fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles yet his feeble feet for faintnesse reeld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the Gyaunt lowdly she gan call;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"O! helpe, Orgoglio; helpe! or els we perish all."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At her so pitteous cry was much amoov'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her champion stout; and for to ayde his frend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Againe his wonted angry weapon proov'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all in vaine, for he has redd his end</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In that bright shield, and all their forces spend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them selves in vaine: for, since that glauncing sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He hath no powre to hurt, nor to defend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As where th' Almighties lightning brond does light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It dimmes the dazed eyen, and daunts the sences quight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when the Prince, to batteill new addrest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And threatning high his dreadfull stroke, did see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His sparkling blade about his head he blest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And smote off quite his right leg by the knee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That downe he tombled; as an aged tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">High growing on the top of rocky clift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose hartstrings with keene steele nigh hewen be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The mightie trunck, halfe rent with ragged rift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth roll adowne the rocks, and fall with fearefull drift.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Or as a Castle, reared high and round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By subtile engins and malitious slight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is undermined from the lowest ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her foundation forst, and feebled quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last downe falles; and with her heaped hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her hastie ruine does more heavie make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yields it selfe unto the victours might.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such was this Gyaunts fall, that seemd to shake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stedfast globe of earth, as it for feare did quake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The knight, then lightly leaping to the pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With mortall steele him smot againe so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That headlesse his unweldy bodie lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All wallowd in his owne fowle bloody gore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which flowed from his wounds in wondrous store.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, soone as breath out of his brest did pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That huge great body, which the Gyaunt bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was vanisht quite; and of that monstrous mas</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was nothing left, but like an emptie blader was.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whose grievous fall when false Duessa spyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her golden cup she cast unto the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And crowned mitre rudely threw asyde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such percing griefe her stubborne hart did wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she could not endure that dolefull stound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But leaving all behind her fled away:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The light-foot Squyre her quickly turnd around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, by hard meanes enforcing her to stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So brought unto his Lord as his deserved pray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The roiall Virgin which beheld from farre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In pensive plight and sad perplexitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whole atchievement of this doubtfull warre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came running fast to greet his victorie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sober gladnesse and myld modestie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with sweet joyous cheare him thus bespake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Fayre braunch of noblesse, flowre of chevalrie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with your worth the world amazed make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How shall I quite the paynes ye suffer for my sake?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And you, fresh budd of vertue springing fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom these sad eyes saw nigh unto deaths dore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What hath poore Virgin for such perill past</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith you to reward? Accept therefore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My simple selfe, and service evermore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he that high does sit, and all things see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With equall eye, their merites to restore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behold what ye this day have done for mee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what I cannot quite requite with usuree.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But sith the heavens, and your faire handeling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have made you master of the field this day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your fortune maister eke with governing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, well begonne, end all so well, I pray!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne let that wicked woman scape away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she it is, that did my Lord bethrall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My dearest Lord, and deepe in dongeon lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where he his better dayes hath wasted all:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O heare, how piteous he to you for ayd does call!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Forthwith he gave in charge unto his Squyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That scarlot whore to keepen carefully;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whyles he himselfe with greedie great desyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the Castle entred forcibly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where living creature none he did espye.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan he lowdly through the house to call;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But no man car'd to answere to his crye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There raignd a solemne silence over all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor voice was heard, nor wight was scene in bowre or hall,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last, with creeping crooked pace forth came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An old old man, with beard as white as snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That on a staffe his feeble steps did frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And guyde his wearie gate both too and fro,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For his eye sight him fayled long ygo;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on his arme a bounch of keyes he bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which unused rust did overgrow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those were the keyes of every inner dore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he could not them use, but kept them still in store.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But very uncouth sight was to behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How he did fashion his untoward pace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For as he forward moovd his footing old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So backward still was turnd his wrincled face:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unlike to men, who ever, as they trace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both feet and face one way are wont to lead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This was the auncient keeper of that place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And foster father of the Gyaunt dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His name Ignaro did his nature right aread.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His reverend heares and holy gravitee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The knight much honord, as beseemed well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gently askt, where all the people bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which in that stately building wont to dwell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who answerd him full soft, <i>he could not tell</i>.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Again he askt, where that same knight was layd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom great Orgoglio with his puissaunce fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had made his caytive thrall: againe he sayde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>He could not tell</i>; ne ever other answere made.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then asked he, which way he in might pas?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><i>He could not tell</i>, againe he answered.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereat the courteous knight displeased was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said; "Old syre, it seemes thou hast not red</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How ill it sits with that same silver hed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In vaine to mocke, or mockt in vaine to bee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if thou be, as thou art pourtrahed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With natures pen, in ages grave degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A read in graver wise what I demaund of thee."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His answere likewise was, <i>he could not tell</i>:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose sencelesse speach, and doted ignorance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whenas the noble Prince had marked well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He ghest his nature by his countenance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And calmd his wrath with goodly temperance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, to him stepping, from his arme did reach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those keyes, and made himselfe free enterance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each dore he opened without any breach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was no barre to stop, nor foe him to empeach.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There all within full rich arayd he found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With royall arras, and resplendent gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did with store of every thing abound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That greatest Princes presence might behold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all the floore (too filthy to be told)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With blood of guiltlesse babes, and innocents trew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which there were slaine as sheepe out of the fold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Defiled was, that dreadfull was to vew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sacred ashes over it was strowed new.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And there beside of marble stone was built</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An Altare, carv'd with cunning ymagery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which trew Christians blood was often spilt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And holy Martyres often doen to dye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With cruell malice and strong tyranny:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose blessed sprites, from underneath the stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To God for vengeance cryde continually;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with great griefe were often heard to grone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That hardest heart would bleede to hear their piteous mone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Through every rowme he sought, and everie bowr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But no where could he find that wofull thrall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last he came unto an yron doore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That fast was lockt, but key found not at all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emongst that bounch to open it withall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in the same a little grate was pight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through which he sent his voyce, and lowd did call</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all his powre, to weet if living wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were housed therewithin, whom he enlargen might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith an hollow, dreary, murmuring voyce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These pitteous plaintes and dolours did resound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"O! who is that, which bringes me happy choyce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of death, that here lye dying every stound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet live perforce in balefull darkenesse bound?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For now three Moones have changed thrice their hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And have been thrice hid underneath the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since I the heavens chearefull face did vew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O! welcome thou, that doest of death bring tydings trew."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when that Champion heard, with percing point</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of pitty deare his heart was thrilled sore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And trembling horrour ran through every joynt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ruth of gentle knight so fowle forlore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which shaking off, he rent that yron dore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With furious force and indignation fell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where entred in, his foot could find no flore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all a deepe descent, as darke as hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That breathed ever forth a filthie banefull smell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But nether darkenesse fowle, nor filthy bands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor noyous smell, his purpose could withhold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Entire affection hateth nicer hands)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that with constant zele and corage bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After long paines and labors manifold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He found the meanes that Prisoner up to reare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose feeble thighes, unable to uphold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His pined corse, him scarse to light could beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A ruefull spectacle of death and ghastly drere.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His sad dull eies, deepe sunck in hollow pits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could not endure th'unwonted sunne to view;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His bare thin cheekes for want of better bits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And empty sides deceived of their dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could make a stony hart his hap to rew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His rawbone armes, whose mighty brawned bowrs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were wont to rive steele plates, and helmets hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were clene consum'd; and all his vitall powres</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Decayd, and al his flesh shronk up like withered flowres.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whome when his Lady saw, to him she ran</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hasty joy: to see him made her glad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sad to view his visage pale and wan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who earst in flowres of freshest youth was clad.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, when her well of teares she wasted had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She said; "Ah dearest Lord! what evill starre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On you hath frownd, and pourd his influence bad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of your selfe ye thus berobbed arre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this misseeming hew your manly looks doth marre?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But welcome now, my Lord in wele or woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose presence I have lackt too long a day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fie on Fortune, mine avowed foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose wrathful wreakes them selves doe now alay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for these wronges shall treble penaunce pay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of treble good: good growes of evils priefe."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The chearelesse man, whom sorrow did dismay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had no delight to treaten of his griefe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His longr.endured famine needed more reliefe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Faire Lady," then said that victorious knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"The things, that grievous were to doe, or beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them to renew, I wote, breeds no delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Best musicke breeds delight in loathing eare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But th'only good that growes of passed feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is to be wise, and ware of like agein.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This daies ensample hath this lesson deare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deepe written in my heart with yron pen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That blisse may not abide in state of mortall men.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Henceforth, Sir knight, take to you wonted strength,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And maister these mishaps with patient might.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Loe! where your foe lies strecht in monstrous length;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And loe! that wicked woman in your sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The roote of all your care and wretched plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now in your powre, to let her live, or die."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"To doe her die," (quoth Una) "were despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shame t'avenge so weake an enimy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But spoile her of her scarlot robe, and let her fly."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So, as she bad, that witch they disaraid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And robd of roiall robes, and purple pall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ornaments that richly were displaid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne spared they to strip her naked all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, when they had despoyld her tire and call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as she was their eies might her behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her misshaped parts did them appall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A loathly, wrinckled hag, ill favoured, old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose secret filth good manners biddeth not be told.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her crafty head was altogether bald,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, as in hate of honorable eld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was overgrowne with scurfe and filthy scald;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her teeth out of her rotten gummes were feld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her sowre breath abhominably smeld;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her dried dugs, lyke bladders lacking wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hong downe, and filthy matter from them weld;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her wrizled skin, as rough as maple rind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So scabby was that would have loathd all womankind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her neather parts, the shame of all her kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My chaster Muse for shame doth blush to write;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But at her rompe she growing had behind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A foxes taile, with dong all fowly dight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke her feete most monstrous were in sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For one of them was like an Eagles claw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With griping talaunts armd to greedy fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other like a beares uneven paw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More ugly shape yet never living creature saw.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when the knights beheld amazd they were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wondred at so fowle deformed wight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Such then," (said Una,) "as she seemeth here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such is the face of falshood: such the sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of fowle Duessa, when her borrowed light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is laid away, and counterfesaunce knowne."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus when they had the witch disrobed quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all her filthy feature open showne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They let her goe at will, and wander waies unknowne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Shee, flying fast from heavens hated face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from the world that her discovered wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fled to the wastfull wildernesse apace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From living eies her open shame to hide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lurkt in rocks and caves, long unespide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that faire crew of knights, and Una faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did in that castle afterwards abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To rest them selves, and weary powres repaire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where store they fownd of al that dainty was and rare.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-9" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>His loves and linage Arthur tells:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The Knights knitt friendly hands:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sir Trevisan flies from Desprure,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Whom Redcrosse Knight withstands.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>O goodly golden chayne, wherewith yfere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The vertues linked are in lovely wize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And noble mindes of yore allyed were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In brave poursuitt of chevalrous emprize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none did others safety despize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor aid envy to him in need that stands;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But friendly each did others praise devize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How to advaunce with favourable hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As this good Prince redeemd the Redcrosse knight from bands.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who when their powres, empayrd through labor long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With dew repast they had recured well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that weake captive wight now wexed strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them list no lenger there at leasure dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But forward fare as their adventures fell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, ere they parted, Una faire besought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That straunger knight his name and nation tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least so great good, as he for her had wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should die unknown, and buried be in thankles thought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Faire virgin," (said the Prince,) "yee me require</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A thing without the compas of my witt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For both the lignage, and the certein Sire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From which I sprong, from mee are hidden yitt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all so soone as life did me admitt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into this world, and shewed hevens light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From mothers pap I taken was unfitt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And streight deliver'd to a Fary knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be upbrought in gentle thewes and martiall might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Unto Old Timon he me brought bylive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Old Timon, who in youthly yeares hath beene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In warlike feates th'expertest man alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And is the wisest now on earth I weene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His dwelling is low in a valley greene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under the foot of Rauran mossy hore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whence the river Dee, as silver cleene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His tombling billowes rolls with gentle rore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There all my daies he traind mee up in vertuous lore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Thither the great magicien Merlin came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As was his use, ofttimes to visitt mee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he had charge my discipline to frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Tutors nouriture to oversee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him oft and oft I askt in privity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of what loines and what lignage I did spring;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose aunswere bad me still assured bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I was sonne and heire unto a king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As time in her just term the truth to light should bring."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Well worthy impe," said then the Lady gent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"And Pupill fitt for such a Tutors hand!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But what adventure, or what high intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath brought you hither into Faery land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Aread, Prince Arthure, crowne of Martiall band?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Full hard it is," (quoth he) "to read aright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The course of heavenly cause, or understand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The secret meaning of th'eternall might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That rules mens waies, and rules the thoughts of living wight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"For whether he, through fatal deepe foresight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me hither sent for cause to me unghest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that fresh bleeding wound, which day and night</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilome doth rancle in my riven brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With forced fury following his behest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me hither brought by wayes yet never found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You to have helpt I hold my selfe yet blest."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ah! courteous Knight," (quoth she) "what secret wound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could ever find to grieve the gentlest hart on ground?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Dear Dame," (quoth he) "you sleeping sparkes awake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, troubled once, into huge flames will grow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever will their fervent fury slake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till living moysture into smoke do flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wasted life doe lye in ashes low:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet sithens silence lesseneth not my fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, told, it flames; and, hidden, it does glow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I will revele what ye so much desire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, Love! lay down thy bow, the whiles I may respyre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"It was in freshest flowre of youthly yeares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When coragc first does creepe in manly chest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then first the cole of kindly heat appeares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To kindle love in every living Brest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But me had warnd old Timons wise behest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those creeping flames by reason to subdew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before their rage grew to so great unrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As miserable lovers use to rew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which still wex old in woe, whiles wo stil wexeth new.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"That ydle name of love, and lovers life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As losse of time, and vertues enimy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I ever scornd, and joyd to stirre up strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In middest of their mournfull Tragedy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ay wont to laugh when them I heard to cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And blow the fire which them to ashes brent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their God himselfe, grievd at my libertie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shott many a dart at me with fiers intent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I them warded all with wary government.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But all in vaine: no fort can be so strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne fleshly brest can armed be so sownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But will at last be wonne with battrie long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or unawares at disavantage fownd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nothing is sure that growes on earthly grownd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And who most trustes in arme of fleshly might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And boastes in beauties chaine not to be bownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth soonest fall in disaventrous fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yeeldes his caytive neck to vigours most despight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ensample make of him your haplesse joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of my selfe now mated, as ye see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose prouder vaunt that proud avenging boy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did soone pluck downe, and curbd my libertee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For on a day, prickt forth with jollitee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of looser life and heat of hardiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Raunging the forest wide on courser free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fields, the floods, the heavens, with one consent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did seeme to laugh on me, and favour mine intent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Forwearied with my sportes, I did alight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From loftie steed, and downe to sleepe me layd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The verdant gras my couch did goodly dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pillow was my helmett fayre displayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles every sence the humour sweet embayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And slombring soft my hart did steale away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me seemed, by my side a royall Mayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her daintie limbes full softly down did lay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So fayre a creature yet saw never sunny day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Most goodly glee and lovely blandishment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She to me made, and badd me love her deare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For dearely sure her love was to me bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As, when just time expired, should appeare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But whether dreames delude, or true it were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was never hart so ravisht with delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne living man like wordes did ever heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As she to me delivered all that night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at her parting said, She Queene of Faeries hight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"When I awoke, and found her place devoyd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And nought but pressed gras where she had lyen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I sorrowed all so much as earst 1 joyd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And washed all her place with watry eyen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From that day forth I lov'd that face divyne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From that day forth I cast in carefull mynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seek her out with labor and long tyne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And never vowd to rest till her I fynd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nyne monethes I seek in vain, yet ni'll that vow unbynd."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus as he spake, his visage wexed pale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chaunge of hew great passion did bewray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yett still he strove to cloke his inward bale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hide the smoke that did his fire display,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till gentle Una thus to him gan say:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"O happy Queene of Faeries! that hast fownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst many, one that with his prowesse may</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Defend thine honour, and thy foes confownd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>True loves are often sown, but seldom grow on grownd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Thine, O! then," said the gentle Redcrosse knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Next to that Ladies love, shalbe the place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O fayrest virgin! full of heavenly light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose wondrous faith, exceeding earthly race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was firmest fixt in myne extremest case.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And you, my Lord, the Patrone of my life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that great Queene may well gaine worthie grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For onely worthie you through prowes priefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yf living man mote worthie be to be her liefe."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So diverslv discoursing: of their loves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The golden Sunne his glistring head gan shew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sad remembraunce now the Prince amoves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With fresh desire his voyage to purse w;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Als Una earnd her traveill to renew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then those two knights, fast friendship for to bynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And love establish each to other trew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gave goodly gifts, the signes of gratefull mynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke, as pledges firme, right hands together joynd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Prince Arthur gave a boxe of Diamond sure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Embowd with gold and gorgeous ornament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein were closd few drops of liquor pure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of wondrous worth, and vertue excellent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That any wownd could heale incontinent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to requite, the Redcrosse knight him gave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A booke, wherein his Saveours testament</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was writt with golden letters rich and brave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A worke of wondrous grace, and hable soules to save.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus beene they parted; Arthur on his way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke his love, and th'other for to fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Unaes foe, that all her realme did pray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she, now weighing the decayed plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shrunken synewes of her chosen knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would not a while her forward course pursew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne bring him forth in face of dreadfull fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till he recovered had his former hew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For him to be yet weake and wearie well she knew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So as they traveild, lo! they gan espy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">d knight towards them gallop fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemed from some feared foe to fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Qr other griesly thing that him aghast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still as he fledd his eye was backward cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if his feare still followed him behynd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Als flew his steed as he his bandes had brast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his winged heeles did tread the wynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he had beene a fole of Pegasus his kynd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nigh as he drew, they might perceive his head</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bee unarmd, and curld uncombed heares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upstaring stiffe, dismaid with uncouth dread:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor drop of blood in all his face appeares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor life in limbe; and, to increase his feares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In fowle reproch of knighthoodes fayre degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About his neck an hempen rope he weares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with his glistring armes does ill agree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he of rope or armes has now no memoree.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Redcrosse knight toward him crossed fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet what mister wight was so dismayd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There him he findes all sencelesse and aghast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of him selfe he seemd to be afrayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom hardly he from flying forward stayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till he these wordes to him deliver might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Sir knight, aread who hath ye thus arayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke from whom make ye this hasty flight?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For never knight I saw in such misseeming plight."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He answerd nought at all; but adding new</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Feare to his first amazment, staring wyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With stony eyes and hartlesse hollow hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Astonisht stood, as one that had aspyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Infernall furies with their chaines untyde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him yett againe, and yett againe, bespake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gentle knight; who nought to him replyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, trembling every joynt, did inly quake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And foltring tongue, at last, these words seemd forth to shake;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"For Gods deare love, Sir knight, doe me not stay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For loe! he comes, he comes fast after mee."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eft looking back would faine have runne away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he him forst to stay, and tellen free</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The secrete cause of his perplexitie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet nathemore by his bold hartie speach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could his blood frosen hart emboldened bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But through his boldnes rather feare did reach;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yett, forst, at last he made through silence suddein breach.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And am I now in safetie sure," (quoth he)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"From him that would have forced me to dye?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And is the point of death now turnd fro mee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I may tell this haplesse history?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Fear nought," (quoth he) "no daunger now is nye."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Then shall I you recount a ruefull cace,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Said he) "the which with this unlucky eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I late beheld; and, had not greater grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me reft from it, had bene partaker of the place.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"I lately chaunst (Would I had never chaunst!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a fayre knight to keepen companee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir Terwin hight, that well himselfe advaunst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In all affayres, and was both bold and free;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But not so happy as mote happy bee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He lov'd, as was his lot, a Lady gent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That him againe lov'd in the least degree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she was proud, and of too high intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And joyd to see her lover languish and lament:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"From whom retourning sad and comfortlesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As on the way together we did fare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We met that villen, (God from him me blesse!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That cursed wight, from whom I scapt whyleare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A man of hell that calls himselfe Despayre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who first us greets, and after fayre areedes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of tydinges straunge, and of adventures rare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So creeping close, as Snake in hidden weedes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inquireth of our states, and of our knightly deedes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Which when he knew, and felt our feeble harts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Embost with bale, and bitter byting griefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which love had launched with his deadly darts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With wounding words, and termes of foule repriefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He pluckt from us all hope of dew reliefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That earst us held in love of lingring life;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then hopelesse, hartlesse, gan the cunning thiefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perswade us dye, to stint all further strife:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To me he lent this rope, to him a rusty knife.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"With which sad instrument of hasty death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That wofull lover, loathing lenger light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A wyde way made to let forth living breath:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But I, more fearefull or more lucky wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dismayd with that deformed dismall sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fledd fast away, halfe dead with dying feare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne yet assur'd of life by you, Sir knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose like infirmity like chaunce may beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But God you never let his charmed speaches heare!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"How may a man," (said he) "with idle speach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be wonne to spoyle the Castle of his health?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"I wote," (quoth he) "whom tryall late did teach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That like would not for all this worldes wealth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His subtile tong like dropping honny mealt'h</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the heart, and searcheth every vaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, ere one be aware, by secret stealth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His powre is reft, and weaknes doth remaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O! never, Sir, desire to try his guilefull traine."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Certes," (sayd he) "hence shall I never rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till I that treachours art have heard and tryde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And you, Sir knight, whose name mote I request,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of grace do me unto his cabin guyde."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"I, that hight Trevisan," (quoth he) "will ryde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against my liking backe to doe you grace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But nor for gold nor glee will I abyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By you, when ye arrive in that same place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For lever had I die then see his deadly face."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ere long they come where that same wicked wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His dwelling has, low in an hollow cave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far underneath a craggy cliff ypight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Darke, dolefull, dreary, like a greedy grave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That still for carrion carcases doth crave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On top whereof ay dwelt the ghastly Owle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shrieking his balefull note, which ever drave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far from that haunt all other chearefull fowle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all about it wandring ghostes did wayle and howle.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And all about old stockes and stubs of trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereon nor fruit nor leafe was ever scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did hang upon the ragged rocky knees;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which had many wretches hanged beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose carcases were scattred on the greene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And throwne about the cliffs. Arrived there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That bare-head knight, for dread and dolefull teene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would faine have fled, ne durst approchen neare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But th'other forst him staye, and comforted in feare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That darkesome cave they enter, where they find</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That cursed man, low sitting on the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Musing full sadly in his sullein mind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His griesie lockes, long growen and unbound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disordred hong about his shoulders round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hid his face; through which his hollow eyne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lookt deadly dull, and stared as astound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His raw-bone cheekes, through penurie and pine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were shronke into his jawes, as he did never dyne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His garment, nought but many ragged clouts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With thornes together pind and patched was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which his naked sides he wrapt abouts;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him beside there lay upon the gras</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A dreary corse, whose life away did pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All wallowd in his own yet luke-warme blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from his wound yet welled fresh, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which a rusty knife fast fixed stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made an open passage for the gushing flood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which piteous spectacle, approving trew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wofull tale that Trevisan had told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whenas the gentle Redcrosse knight did vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With firie zeale he burnt in courage bold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him to avenge before his blood were cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the villein sayd; "Thou damned wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The authour of this facl: we here behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What justice can but judge against thee right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With thine owne blood to price his blood, here shed in sight?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"What franticke fit," (quoth he) "hath thus distraught</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thee, foolish man, so rash a doome to give?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What justice ever other judgement taught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he should dye who merites not to live?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">None els to death this man despayring drive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But his owne guiltie mind, deserving death.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is then unjust to each his dew to give?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or let him dye, that loatheth living breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or let him die at ease, that liveth here uneath?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Who travailes by the wearie wandring way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To come unto his wished home in haste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And meetes a flood that doth his passage stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is not great grace to helpe him over past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or free his feet that in the myre sticke fast?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most envious man, that grieves at neighbours good;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fond, that joyest in the woe thou hast!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why wilt not let him passe, that long hath stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the bancke, yet wilt thy selfe not pas the flood?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"He there does now enjoy eternall rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And happy ease, which thou doest want and crave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And further from it daily wanderest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What if some little payne the passage have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That makes frayle flesh to feare the bitter wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is not short payne well borne, that bringes long ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And layes the soule to sleepe in quiet grave?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sleepe after toyle, port after stormie seas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ease after warre, death after life, does greatly please."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The knight much wondred at his suddeine wit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sayd; "The terme of life is limited,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne may a man prolong, nor shorten, it:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The souldier may not move from watchfull sted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor leave his stand untill his Captaine bed."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Who life did limit by almightie doome,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Quoth he) "knowes best the termes established;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he, that points the Centonell his roome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth license him depart at sound of morning droome.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Is not his deed, what ever thing is donne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In heaven and earth? Did not he all create</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To die againe? All ends that was begonne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their times in his eternall booke of fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are written sure, and have their certein date.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who then can strive with strong necessitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That holds the world in its still chaunging state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or shunne the death ordaynd by destinie?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When houre of death is come, let none aske whence, nor why.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"The lenger life, I wote, the greater sin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The greater sin, the greater punishment:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All those great battels, which thou boasts to win</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through strife, and blood-shed, and avengement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now praysd, hereafter deare thou shalt repent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For life must life, and blood must blood, repay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is not enough thy evill life forespent?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he that once hath missed the right way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The further he doth goe, the further he doth stray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Then doe no further goe, no further stray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But here ly downe, and to thy rest betake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th' ill to prevent, that life ensewen may;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For what hath life that may it loved make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gives not rather cause it to forsake?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Feare, sicknesse, age, losse, labour, sorrow, strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Payne, hunger, cold that makes the hart to quake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever fickle fortune rageth rife;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All which, and thousands mo, do make a loathsome life.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Thou, wretched man, of death hast greatest need,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If in true ballaunce thou wilt weigh thy state;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For never knight, that dared warlike deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More luckless dissaventures did amate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Witnes the dungeon deepe, wherein of late</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy life shutt up for death so oft did call;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And though good lucke prolonged hath thy date,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet death then would the like mishaps forestall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the which hereafter thou maist happen fall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Why then doest thou, O man of sin! desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To draw thy dayes forth to their last degree?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is not the measure of thy sinfull hire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">High heaped up with huge iniquitee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the day of wrath to burden thee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is not enough, that to this Lady mild</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou falsed hast thy faith with perjuree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sold thy selfe to serve Duessa vild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With whom in al abuse thou hast thy selfe defild?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Is not he just, that all this doth behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From highest heven, and beares an equall eie?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall he thy sins up in his knowledge fold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And guilty be of thine impietie?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is not his lawe, Let every sinner die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Die shall all flesh? What then must needs be donne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is it not better to doe willinglie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then linger till the glas be all out ronne?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death is the end of woes: die soone, O faeries sonne!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The knight was much enmoved with his speach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That as a swords poynt through his hart did perse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his conscience made a secrete breach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well knowing trew all that he did reherse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to his fresh remembraunce did reverse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The ugly vew of his deformed crimes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all his manly powres it did disperse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he were charmed with inchaunted rimes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That oftentimes he quakt, and fainted oftentimes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In which amazement when the Miscreaunt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perceived him to waver, weake and fraile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles trembling horror did his conscience daunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hellish anguish did his soule assaile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To drive him to despaire, and quite to quaile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hee shewd him, painted in a table plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The damned ghosts that doe in torments waile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thousand feends that doe them endlesse paine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With fire and brimstone, which for ever shall remaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The sight whereof so throughly him dismaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nought but death before his eies he saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever burning wrath before him laid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By righteous sentence of th'Almighties law.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan the villein him to overcraw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And brought unto him swords, ropes, poison, fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all that might him to perdition draw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bad him choose what death he would desire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For death was due to him that had provokt Gods ire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, whenas none of them he saw him take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He to him raught a dagger sharpe and keene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gave it him in hand: his hand did quake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tremble like a leafe of Aspin greene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And troubled blood through his pale face was scene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To come and goe with tidings from the heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As it a ronning messenger had beene.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last, resolv'd to work his finall smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He lifted up his hand, that backe againe did start.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which whenas Una saw, through every vaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The crudled cold ran to her well of life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As in a swowne: but, soone reliv'd againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of his hand she snatcht the cursed knife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And threw it to the ground, enraged rife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to him said; "Fie, fie, faint hearted Knight!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What meanest thou by this reprochfull strife?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is this the battaile which thou vauntst to fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With that fire-mouthed Dragon, horrible and bright?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Come; come away, fraile, feeble, fleshly wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne let vaine words bewitch thy manly hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne divelish thoughts dismay thy constant spright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In heavenly mercies hast thou not a part?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why shouldst thou then despeire, that chosen art?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where justice growes, there grows eke greater grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which doth quench the brond of hellish smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that accurst hand-writing doth deface.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arise, sir Knight; arise, and leave this cursed place."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So up he rose, and thence amounted streight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when the carle beheld, and saw his guest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would safe depart, for all his subtile sleight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He chose an halter from among the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with it hong him selfe, unhid, unblest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But death he could not worke himselfe thereby;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thousand times he so him selfe had drest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet nathelesse it could not doe him die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till he should die his last, that is, eternally.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-10" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Her faithfull knight faire Una brings</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To house of Holinesse;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whre he is taught repentance, and</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">She way to hevenly blesse.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>What man is he, that boasts of fleshly might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And vaine assuraunce of mortality,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, all so soone as it doth come to fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against spirituall foes, yields by and by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or from the fielde most cowardly doth fly!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne let the man ascribe it to his skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That thorough grace hath gained vidtory:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If any strength we have, it is to ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all the good is Gods, both power and eke will.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By that which lately hapned Una saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That this her knight was feeble, and too faint;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all his sinewes woxen weake and raw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through long enprisonment, and hard constraint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he endured in his late restraint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That yet he was unfitt for bloody fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore, to cherish him with diets daint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She cast to bring him where he chearen might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till he recovered had his late decayed plight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There was an auncient house nor far away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Renowmd throughout the world for sacred lore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pure unspotted life: so well, they say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It governd was, and guided evermore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through wisedome of a matrone grave and hore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose onely joy was to relieve the needes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of wretched soules, and helpe the helpelesse pore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All night she spent in bidding of her bedes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the day in doing good and godly deedes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Dame Caelia men did her call, as thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From heaven to come, or thither to arise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The mother of three daughters, well upbrought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In goodly thewes, and godly exercise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The eldest two, most sober, chast, and wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fidelia and Speranza, virgins were;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though spousd, yet wanting wedlocks solemnize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But faire Charissa to a lovely fere</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was lincked, and by him had many pledges dere.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Arrived there, the dore they find fast lockt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For it was warely watched night and day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For feare of many foes; but, when they knockt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Porter opened unto them streight way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He was an aged syre, all hory gray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With lookes full lowly cast, and gate full slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wont on a staffe his feeble steps to stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hight Humilta. They passe in, stouping low;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For streight and narrow was the way which he did show.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Each goodly thing is hardest to begin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, entred in, a spatious court they see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both plaine and pleasaunt to be walked in;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where them does meete a francklin faire and free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And entertaines with comely courteous glee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His name was Zele, that him right well became:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For in his speaches and behaveour hee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did labour lively to expresse the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gladly did them guide, till to the Hall they came.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There fayrely them receives a gentle Squyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of myld demeanure and rare courtesee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right cleanly clad in comely sad attyre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In word and deede that shewd great modestee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And knew his good to all of each degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hight Reverence. He them with speaches meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Does faire entreat; no courting nicetee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But simple, trew, and eke unfained sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As might become a Squyre so great persons to greet.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And afterwardes them to his Dame he leades,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That aged Dame, the Lady of the place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who all this while was busy at her beades;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which doen, she up arose with seemely grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And toward them full matronely did pace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where, when that fairest Una she beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom well she knew to spring from hevenly race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her heart with joy unwonted inly sweld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As feeling wondrous comfort in her weaker eld:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, her embracing, said; "O happy earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereon thy innocent feet doe ever tread!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most vertuous virgin, borne of hevenly berth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, to redeeme thy woefull parents head</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From tyrans rage and ever-dying dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hast wandred through the world now long a day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yett ceassest not thy weary soles to lead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What grace hath thee now hither brought this way?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or doen thy feeble feet unweeting hither stray?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Straunge thing it is an errant knight to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here in this place; or any other wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hither turnes his steps. So few there bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That chose the narrow path, or seeke the right:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All keepe the broad high way, and take delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With many rather for to goe astray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And be partakers of their evill plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then with a few to walke the rightest way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O foolish men! why hast ye to your own decay?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Thy selfe to see, and tyred limbes to rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O matrone sage," (quoth she) "I hither came;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And this good knight his way with me addrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ledd with thy prayses, and broad-blazed fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That up to heven is blowne." The auncient Dame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him goodly greeted in her modest guyse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And enterteynd them both, as best became,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all the court'sies that she could devyse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne wanted ought to shew her bounteous or wise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus as they gan of sondrie things devise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Loe! two most goodly virgins came in place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ylinked arme in arme in lovely wise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With countenance demure, and modest grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They numbred even steps and equall pace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which the eldest, that Fidelia hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like sunny beames threw from her Christall face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That could have dazd the rash beholders sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And round about her head did shine like hevens light.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She was araied all in lilly white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in her right hand bore a cup of gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With wine and water fild up to the hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which a Serpent did himselfe enfold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That horrour made to all that did behold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she no whitt did chaunge her constant mood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in her other hand she fast did hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A booke, that was both signd and seald with blood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein darke things were writt, hard to be understood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her younger sister, that Speranza hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was clad in blew, that her beseemed well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not all so chearefull seemed she of sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As was her sister: whether dread did dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or anguish in her hart, is hard to tell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon her arme a silver anchor lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereon she leaned ever, as befell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever up to heven, as she did pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her stedfast eyes were bent, ne swarved other way.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They, seeing Una, towardes her gan wend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who them encounters with like courtesee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Many kind speeches they betweene them spend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And greatly joy each other for to see:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then to the knight with shamefast modestie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They turne themselves, at Unaes meeke request,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him salute with well beseeming glee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who faire them quites, as him beseemed best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And goodly gan discourse of many a noble gest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then Una thus: "But she, your sister deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The deare Charissa, where is she become?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or wants she health, or busie is elswhere?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ah! no," said they, "but forth she may not come;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she of late is lightned of her wombe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hath encreast the world with one sonne more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her to see should be but troublesome."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Indeed," (quoth she) "that should her trouble sore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thankt be God, and her encrease so evermore!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then said the aged Caelia, "Deare dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And you, good Sir, I wote that of your toyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And labors long, through which ye hither came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye both forwearied be: therefore, a whyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I read you rest, and to your bowres recoyle."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then called she a Groome, that forth him ledd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into a goodly lodge, and gan despoile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of puissant armes, and laid in easie bedd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His name was meeke Obedience, rightfully aredd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now when their wearie limbes with kindly rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bodies were refresht with dew repast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayre Una gan Fidelia fayre request,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To have her knight into her schoolehous plaste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of her heavenly learning he might taste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heare the wisedom of her wordes divine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She graunted; and that knight so much agraste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she him taught celestiall discipline,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And opened his dull eyes, that light mote in them shine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And that her sacred Booke, with blood ywritt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none could reade except she did them teach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She unto him disclosed every whitt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heavenly documents thereout did preach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That weaker witt of man could never reach;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of God; of grace; of justice; of free-will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That wonder was to heare her goodly speach;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she was hable with her wordes to kill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rayse againe to life the hart that she did thrill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, when she list poure out her larger spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She would commaund the hasty Sunne to stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or backward turne his course from hevens hight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes great hostes of men she could dismay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dry-shod to passe she parts the flouds in tway;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke huge mountaines from their native seat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She would commaund themselves to beare away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And throw in raging sea with roaring threat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Almightie God her gave such powre and puissaunce great.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The faithfull knight now grew in little space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By hearing her, and by her sisters lore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To such perfection of all hevenly grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That wretched world he gan for to abhore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mortall life gan loath as thing forlore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Greevd with remembrance of his wicked wayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And prickt with anguish of his sinnes so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he desirde to end his wretched dayes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So much the dart of sinfull guilt the soule dismayes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But wise Speranza gave him comfort sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And taught him how to take assured hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon her silver anchor, as was meet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Els had his sinnes, so great and manifold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made him forget all that Fidelia told.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In this distressed doubtfull agony,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When him his dearest Una did behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disdeining life, desiring leave to dye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She found her selfe assayld with great perplexity;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And came to Caelia to declare her smart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, well acquainted with that commune plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which sinfull horror workes in wounded hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her wisely comforted all that she might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With goodly counsell and advisement right;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And streightway sent with carefull diligence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To fetch a Leach, the which had great insight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In that disease of grieved conscience,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And well could cure the same: His name was Patience.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who, comming to that sowle-diseased knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could hardly him intreat to tell his grief:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which knowne, and all that noyd his heavie spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well searcht, eftsoones he gan apply relief</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of salves and med'cines, which had passing prief;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thereto added wordes of wondrous might.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which to ease he him recured brief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And much aswag'd the passion of his plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he his paine endur'd, as seeming now more light.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But yet the cause and root of all his ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Inward corruption and infected sin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not purg'd nor heald, behind remained still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And festring sore did ranckle yett within,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Close creeping twixt the marow and the skin:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to extirpe, he laid him privily</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Downe in a darksome lowly place far in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereas he meant his corrosives to apply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with streight diet tame his stubborne malady.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In ashes and sackcloth he did array</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His daintie corse, proud humors to abate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dieted with fasting every day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The swelling of his woundes to mitigate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made him pray both earely and eke late:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever, as superfluous flesh did rott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amendment readie still at hand did wayt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To pluck it out with pincers fyrie whott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That soone in him was lefte no one corrupted jott.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And bitter Penaunce, with an yron whip,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was wont him once to disple every day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sharp Remorse his hart did prick and nip,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That drops of blood thence like a well did play:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sad Repentance used to embay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His blamefull body in salt water sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The filthy blottes of sin to wash away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So in short space they did to health restore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The man that would not live, but erst lay at deathes dore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In which his torment often was so great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That like a Lyon he would cry and rore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rend his flesh, and his owne synewes eat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His owne deare Una, hearing evermore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His ruefull shriekes and gronings, often tore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her guiltlesse garments and her golden heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For pitty of his payne and anguish sore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet all with patience wisely she did beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For well she wist his cryme could els be never cleare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom, thus recover'd by wise Patience</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And trew Repentaunce, they to Una brought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, joyous of his cured conscience,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him dearely kist, and fayrely eke besought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himselfe to chearish, and consuming thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To put away out of his carefull brest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By this Charissa, late in child-bed brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was woxen strong, and left her fruitfull nest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To her fayre Una brought this unacquainted guest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She was a woman in her freshest age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of wondrous beauty, and of bounty rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With goodly grace and comely personage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was on earth not easie to compare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of great love, but Cupids wanton snare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As hell she hated; chaste in worke and will:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her necke and brests were ever open bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ay thereof her babes might sucke their fill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rest was all in yellow robes arayed still.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A multitude of babes about her hong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Playing their sportes, that joyd her to behold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom still she fed whiles they were weake and young,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But thrust them forth still as they wexed old:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on her head she wore a tyre of gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adornd with gemmes and owches wondrous fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose passing price uneath was to be told:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by her syde there sate a gentle payre</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of turtle doves, she sitting in an yvory chayre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The knight and Una entring fayre her greet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bid her joy of that her happy brood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who them requites with court'sies seeming meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And entertaynes with friendly chearefull mood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Una her besought, to be so good</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As in her vertuous rules to schoole her knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now after all his torment well withstood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In that sad house of Penaunce, where his spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had past the paines of hell and long-enduring night.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She was right joyous of her just request;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And taking by the hand that Faeries sonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan him instruct in everie good behest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of love, and righteousnes, and well to donne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wrath and hatred warely to shonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That drew on men Gods hatred and his wrath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many soules in dolours had fordonne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which when him she well instructed hath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From thence to heaven she teacheth him the ready path.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Wherein his weaker wandring steps to guyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An auncient matrone she to her does call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose sober lookes her wisedome well descryde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her name was Mercy; well knowne over-all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be both gratious and eke liberall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom the carefull charge of him she gave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To leade aright, that he should never fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In all his waies through this wide worldes wave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Mercy in the end his righteous soule might save.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The godly Matrone by the hand him beares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth from her presence, by a narrow way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Scattred with bushy thornes and ragged breares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which still before him she remov'd away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nothing might his ready passage stay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever, when his feet encombred were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or gan to shrinke, or from the right to stray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She held him fast, and firmely did upbeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As carefull Nourse her child from falling oft does reare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones unto an holy Hospitall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was foreby the way, she did him bring;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which seven Bead-men, that had vowed all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their life to service of high heavens King,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did spend their daies in doing godly thing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their gates to all were open evermore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That by the wearie way were traveiling;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And one sate wayting ever them before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To call in commers-by that needy were and pore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The first of them, that eldest was and best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the house had charge and governement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Guardian and Steward of the rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His office was to give entertainement</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lodging unto all that came and went;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not unto such as could him feast againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And double quite for that he on them spent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But such as want of harbour did constraine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those for Gods sake his dewty was to entertaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The second was as Almner of the place:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His office was the hungry for to feed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thristy give to drinke; a worke of grace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He feard not once himselfe to be in need,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne car'd to hoord for those whom he did breede:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The grace of God he layd up still in store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which as a stocke he left unto his seede.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He had enough; what need him care for more?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And had he lesse, yet some he would give to the pore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The third had of their wardrobe custody,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which were not rich tyres, nor garments gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The plumes of pride, and winges of vanity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But clothes meet to keepe keene cold away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And naked nature seemely to aray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which bare wretched wights he dayly clad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The images of God in earthly clay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, if that no spare clothes to give he had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His owne cote he would cut, and it distribute glad.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The fourth appointed by his office was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Poore prisoners to relieve with gratious ayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And captives to redeeme with price of bras</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From Turkes and Sarazins, which them had stayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And though they faulty were, yet well he wayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That God to us forgiveth every howre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much more then that why they in bands were layd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he, that harrowd hell with heavie stowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The faulty soules from thence brought to his heavenly bowre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The fift had charge sick persons to attend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And comfort those in point of death which lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For them most needeth comfort in the end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When sin, and hell, and death, doe most dismay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The feeble soule departing hence away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All is but lost, that living we bestow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If not well ended at our dying day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O man! have mind of that last bitter throw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For as the tree does fall, so lyes it ever low.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The sixt had charge of them now being dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In seemely sort their corses to engrave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And deck with dainty flowres their brydall bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to their heavenly spouse both sweet and brave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They might appeare, when he their soules shall save.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wondrous workmanship of Gods owne mould,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose face he made all beastes to feare, and gave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All in his hand, even dead we honour should.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, dearest God, me graunt, I dead be not defould!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The seventh, now after death and buriall done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had charge the tender Orphans of the dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wydowes ayd, least they should be undone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In face of judgement he their right would plead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought the powre of mighty men did dread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In their defence; nor would for gold or fee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be wonne their rightfull causes downe to tread;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, when they stood in most necessitee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He did supply their want, and gave them ever free.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There when the Elfin knight arrived was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The first and chiefest of the seven, whose care</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was guests to welcome, towardes him did pas;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where seeing Mercie, that his steps upbare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And alwaies led, to her with reverence rare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He humbly louted in meeke lowlinesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seemely welcome for her did prepare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For of their order she was Patronesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Albe Charissa were their chiefest founderesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There she awhile him stayes, himselfe to rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to the rest more hable he might bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">During which time, in every good behest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And godly worke of Almes and charitee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee him instructed with great industree.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shortly therein so perfect he became,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, from the first unto the last degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mortall life he learned had to frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In holy righteousnesse, without rebuke or blame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thence forward by that painfull way they pas</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth to an hill that was both steepe and hy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On top whereof a sacred chappell was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke a litle Hermitage thereby,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein an aged holy man did lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That day and night said his devotion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne other worldly busines did apply:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His name was hevenly Contemplation;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of God and goodnes was his meditation.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Great grace that old man to him given had;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For God he often saw from heavens hight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All were his earthly eien both blunt and bad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through great age had lost their kindly sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet wondrous quick and persaunt was his spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Eagles eie that can behold the Sunne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hill they scale with all their powre and might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That his fraile thighes, nigh weary and fordonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gan faile; but by her helpe the top at last he wonne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There they doe finde that godly aged Sire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With snowy lockes adowne his shoulders shed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As hoary frost with spangles doth attire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The mossy braunches of an Oke halfe ded.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each bone might through his body well be red</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every sinew scene, through his long fast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For nought he car'd his carcas long unfed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mind was full of spiritual repast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pyn'd his flesh to keepe his body low and chast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who, when these two approching he aspide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At their first presence grew agrieved sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That forst him lay his hevenly thoughts aside;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And had he not that Dame respected more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom highly he did reverence and adore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He would not once have moved for the knight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They him saluted, standing far afore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, well them greeting, humbly did requight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And asked to what end they clomb that tedious hight?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"What end," (quoth she) "should cause us take such paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that same end, which every living wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should make his marke high heaven to attaine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is not from hence the way, that leadeth right</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To that most glorious house, that glistreth bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With burning starres and everliving fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof the keies are to thy hand behight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By wise Fidelia? Shee doth thee require,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To shew it to this knight, according his desire."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Thrise happy man," said then the father grave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Whose staggering steps thy steady hand doth lead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shewes the way his sinfull soule to save!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who better can the way to heaven aread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then thou thyselfe, that was both borne and bred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Hevenly throne, where thousand Angels shine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou doest the praiers of the righteous sead</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Present before the majesty divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his avenging wrath to clemency incline.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Yet, since thou bidst, thy pleasure shalbe donne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then come, thou man of earth, and see the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That never yet was scene of Faeries sonne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That never leads the traveiler astray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But after labors long and sad delay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Brings them to joyous rest and endlesse blis.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But first thou must a season fast and pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till from her bands the spright assoiled is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And have her strength recur'd from fraile infirmitis."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That done, he leads him to the highest Mount;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such one as that same mighty man of God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That blood-red billowes, like a walled front,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On either side disparted with his rod,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that his army dry-foot through them yod,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dwelt forty daies upon; where, writt in stone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With bloody letters by the hand of God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bitter doome of death and balefull mone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He did receive, whiles flashing fire about him shone:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Or like that sacred hill, whose head full hie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adornd with fruitfull Olives all arownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is, as it were for endlesse memory</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that deare Lord who oft thereon was fownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ever with a flowring girlond crownd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or like that pleasaunt Mount, that is for ay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through famous Poets verse each where renownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which the thrise three learned Ladies play</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their hevenly notes, and make full many a lovely lay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>From thence, far off he unto him did shew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A little path that was both steepe and long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to a goodly Citty led his vew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose wals and towres were builded high and strong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of perle and precious stone, that earthly tong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cannot describe, nor wit of man can tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Too high a ditty for my simple song.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Citty of the greate king hight it well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein eternall peace and happinesse doth dwell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As he thereon stood gazing, he might see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The blessed Angels to and fro descend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From highest heven in gladsome companee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with great joy into that Citty wend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As commonly as frend does with his frend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat he wondred much, and gan enquere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What stately building durst so high extend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her lofty towres unto the starry sphere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what unknowen nation there empeopled were?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Faire Knight," (quoth he) "Hierusalem that is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The new Hierusalem, that God has built</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For those to dwell in that are chosen his,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His chosen people, purg'd from sinful guilt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With pretious blood, which cruelly was spilt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On cursed tree, of that unspotted lam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That for the sinnes of al the world was kilt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now are they Saints all in that Citty sam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More dear unto their God then younglings to their dam.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Till now," said then the knight, "I weened well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That great Cleopolis, where I have beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which that fa'irest Faery Queene doth dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fairest citty was that might be scene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that bright towre, all built of christall clene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Panthea, seemd the brightest thing that was;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But now by proofe all otherwise I weene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For this great Citty that does far surpas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this bright Angels towre quite dims that towre of glas."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Most trew," then said the holy aged man;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Yet is Cleopolis, for earthly frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fairest peece that eie beholden can;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And well beseemes all knights of noble name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That covett in th' immortall booke of fame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be eternized, that same to haunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doen their service to that soveraigne Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That glory does to them for guerdon graunt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she is hevenly borne, and heaven may justly vaunt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And thou, faire ymp, sprong out from English race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How ever now accompted Elfins sonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well worthy doest thy service for her grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To aide a virgin desolate, foredonne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when thou famous victory hast wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And high emongst all knights hast hong thy shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thenceforth the suitt of earthly conquest shonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wash thy hands from guilt of bloody field:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For blood can nought but sin, and wars but sorrows yield.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Then seek this path that I to thee presage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which after all to heaven shall thee send;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then peaceably thy painefull pilgrimage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To yonder same Hierusalem doe bend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where is for thee ordaind a blessed end:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thou, emongst those Saints whom thou doest see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shalt be a Saint, and thine owne nations frend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Patrone: thou <i>Saint George</i> shalt called bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Saint George</i> of mery <i>England</i>, the signe of victoree."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Unworthy wretch," (quoth he) "of so great grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How dare I thinke such glory to attaine?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"These, that have it attaynd, were in like cace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As wretched men, and lived in like paine."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"But deeds of armes must I at last be faine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Ladies love to leave, so dearely bought?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"What need of armes, where peace doth ay remaine,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Said he) "and bitter battailes all are fought?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As for loose loves, they'are vaine, and vanish into nought."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"O! let me not," (quoth he) "then turne againe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Backe to the world, whose joyes so fruitlesse are;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But let me heare for aye in peace remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or streightway on that last long voiage fare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nothing may my present hope empare."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"That may not be," (said he) "ne maist thou yitt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forgoe that royal maides bequeathed care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who did her cause into thy hand committ,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till from her cursed foe thou have her freely quitt."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Then shall I soone," (quoth he) "so God me grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abett that virgins cause disconsolate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shortly back returne unto this place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To walke this way in Pilgrims poore estate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But now aread, old father, why of late</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Didst thou behight me borne of English blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom all a Faeries sonne doen nominate?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"That word shall I," (said he) "avouchen good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sith to thee is unknowne the cradle of thy brood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"For, well I wote, thou springst from ancient race</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Saxon kinges, that have with mightie hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many bloody battailes fought in face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">High reard their royall throne in Britans land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And vanquisht them, unable to withstand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From thence a Faery thee unweeting reft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There as thou slepst in tender swadling band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her base Elfin brood there for thee left:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such, men do Chaungelings call, so chaung'd by Faeries theft.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Thence she thee brought into this Faery lond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in an heaped furrow did thee hyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where thee a Ploughman all unweeting fond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he his toylesome teme that way did guyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And brought thee up in ploughmans state to byde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof Georgos he thee gave to name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till prickt with courage, and thy forces pryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Faery court thou cam'st to seek for fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And prove thy puissant armes, as seemes thee best became."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"O holy Sire!" (quoth he) "how shall I quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The many favours I with thee have fownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hast my name and nation redd aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And taught the way that does to heaven bownd!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This saide, adowne he looked to the grownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To have returnd; but dazed were his eyne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through passing brightnes, which did quite confound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His feeble sence, and too exceeding shyne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So darke are earthly thinges compar'd to things divine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last, whenas himselfe he gan to fynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Una back he cast him to retyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who him awaited still with pensive mynd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great thankes, and goodly meed, to that good syre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He thens departing gave for his paynes hyre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So came to Una, who him joyd to see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, after litle rest, gan him desyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her adventure myndfull for to bee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So leave they take of Caelia and her daughters three.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-11" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The knight with that old Dragon fights</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Two days incessantly:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The third him overthrowes, and gayns</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Most glorious victory.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>High time now gan it wex for Una fayre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To thinke of those her captive Parents deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And their forwasted kingdom to repayre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereto whenas they now approched neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hartie wordes her knight she gan to cheare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in her modest maner thus bespake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Deare knight, as deare as ever knight was deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all these sorrowes suffer for my sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High heven behold the tedious toyle ye for me take!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Now are we come unto my native soyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the place where all our perilles dwell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here hauntes that feend, and does his dayly spoyle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore, henceforth, bee at your keeping well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever ready for your foeman fell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sparke of noble corage now awake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strive your excellent selfe to excell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shall ye evermore renowmed make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above all knights on earth, that batteill undertake."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And pointing forth, "Lo! yonder is," (said she)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"The brasen towre, in which my parents deare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For dread of that huge feend emprisond be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom I from far see on the walles appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose sight my feeble soule doth greatly cheare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on the top of all I do espye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The watchman wayting tydings glad to heare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, (O my Parents!) might I happily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto you bring, to ease you of your misery!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that they heard a roaring hideous sownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the ayre with terror filled wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seemd uneath to shake the stedfast ground.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones that dreadful Dragon they espyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where stretcht he lay upon the sunny side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of a great hill, himselfe like a great hill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, all so soone as he from far descryde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those glistring armes that heven with light did fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He rousd himselfe full blyth, and hastned them untill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then badd the knight his Lady yede aloof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to an hill herselfe withdraw asyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whence she might behold that battailles proof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke be safe from daunger far descryde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She him obayd, and turnd a little wyde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now, O thou sacred Muse! most learned Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayre ympe of Phoebus and his aged bryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Nourse of time and everlasting fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That warlike handes ennoblest with immortall name;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O! gently come into my feeble brest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Come gently, but not with that mightie rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith the martiall troupes thou doest infest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hartes of great Heroes doest enrage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nought their kindled corage may aswage:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone as thy dreadfull trompe begins to sownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The God of warre with his fiers equipage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou doest awake, sleepe never he so sownd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And scared nations doest with horror sterne astownd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Fayre Goddesse, lay that furious fitt asyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till I of warres and bloody Mars doe sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Bryton fieldes with Sarazin blood be dyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Twixt that great faery Queene and Paynim king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with their horror heven and earth did ring;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A worke of labour long, and endlesse prayse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But now a while lett downe that haughtie string,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to my tunes thy second tenor rayse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I this man of God his godly armes may blaze.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By this, the dreadful Beast drew nigh to hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Halfe flying and halfe footing in his haste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with his largenesse measured much land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made wide shadow under his huge waste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As mountaine doth the valley overcaste.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Approching nigh, he reared high afore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His body monstrous, horrible, and vaste;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, to increase his wondrous greatnes more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was swoln with wrath and poyson, and with bloody gore;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And over all with brasen scales was armd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like plated cote of steele, so couched neare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nought mote perce; ne might his corse bee harmd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With dint of swerd, nor push of pointed speare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which as an Eagle, seeing pray appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His aery plumes doth rouze, full rudely dight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So shaked he, that horror was to heare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For as the clashing of an Armor bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such noyse his rouzed scales did send unto the knight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His flaggy winges, when forth he did display,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were like two sayles, in which the hollow wynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is gathered full, and worketh speedy way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the pennes, that did his pineons bynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were like mayne-yardes with flying canvas lynd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which whenas him list the ayre to beat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there by force unwonted passage fynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cloudes before him fledd for terror great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the hevens stood still amazed with his threat.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His huge long tayle, wownd up in hundred foldes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Does overspred his long bras-scaly back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose wreathed boughtes when ever he unfoldes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thick entangled knots adown does slack,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bespotted as with shieldes of red and blacke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It sweepeth all the land behind him farre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of three furlongs does but litle lacke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at the point two stinges in fixed arre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both deadly sharp, that sharpest steele exceeden farre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But stinges and sharpest steele did far exceed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sharpnesse of his cruel rending clawes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dead was it sure, as sure as death in deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What ever thing does touch his ravenous pawes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or what within his reach he ever drawes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But his most hideous head my tongue to tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Does tremble; for his deepe devouring j awes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wyde gaped, like the griesly mouth of hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through which into his darke abysse all ravin fell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, that more wondrous was, in either jaw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Three ranckes of yron teeth enraunged were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which yett trickling blood, and gobbets raw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of late devoured bodies did appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sight thereof bredd cold congealed feare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to increase, and all atonce to kill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A cloud of smoothering smoke, and sulphure scare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of his stinking gorge forth steemed still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all the ayre about with smoke and stench did fill,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His blazing eyes, like two bright shining shieldes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did burne with wrath, and sparkled living fyre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As two broad Beacons, sett in open fieldes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Send forth their flames Ikr-offltp every shyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And warning give that enimies conspyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With fire and sword the region to invade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So flam'd his eyne with rage and rancorous yre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But far within, as in a hollow glade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those glaring lampes were sett that made a dreadfull shade.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So dreadfully he towardes him did pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forelifting up a-loft his speckled brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And often bounding on the brused gras,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As for great joyance of his newcome guest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones he gan advance his haughty crest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As chauffed Bore his bristles doth upreare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shoke his scales to battaile ready drest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That made the Redcrosse knight nigh quake for feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As bidding bold defyaunce to his foeman neare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The knight gan fayrely couch his steady speare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fiersely ran at him with rigorous might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The pointed steele, arriving rudely theare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His harder hyde would nether perce nor bight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, glauncing by, foorth passed forward right.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet sore amoved with so puissaunt push,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wrathfull beast about him turned light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him so rudely, passing by, did brush</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With his long tayle, that horse and man to ground did rush.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Both horse and man up lightly rose againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fresh encounter towardes him addrest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But th'ydle stroke yet backe recoyld in vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And found no place his deadly point to rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Exceeding rage enflam'd the furious Beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be avenged of so great despight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For never felt his imperceable brest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So wondrous force from hand of living wight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet had he prov'd the powre of many a puissant knight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then, with his waving wings displayed wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himselfe up high he lifted from the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with strong flight did forcibly divyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The yielding ayre, which nigh too feeble found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her flitting parts, and element unsound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To beare so great a weight: he, cutting way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his broad sayles, about him soared round;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last, low stouping with unweldy sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Snatcht up both horse and man, to beare them quite away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Long he them bore above the subject plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So far as Ewghen bow a shaft may send,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till struggling strong did him at last constraine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To let them downe before his flightes end:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As hagard hauke, presuming to contend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hardy fowle above his hable might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His wearie pounces all in vaine doth spend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To trusse the pray too heavy for his flight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, comming down to ground, does free it selfe by fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He so disseized of his gryping grosse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The knight his thrillant speare againe assayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his bras-plated body to embosse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And three mens strength unto the stroake he layd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith the stiffe beame quaked as affrayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And glauncing from his scaly necke did glyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Close under his left wing, then broad displayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The percing steele there wrought a wound full wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That with the uncouth smart the Monster lowdly cryde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He cryde, as raging seas are wont to rore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When wintry storme his wrathful wreck does threat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rolling billowes beate the ragged shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As they the earth would shoulder from her seat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And greedy gulfe does gape, as he would eat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His neighbour element in his revenge:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gin the blustring brethren boldly threat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To move the world from off his stedfast henge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And boystrous battaile make, each other to avenge.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The steely head stuck fast still in his flesh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till with his cruell clawes he snatcht the wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And quite a sunder broke. Forth flowed fresh</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A gushing river of blacke gory blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That drowned all the land whereon he stood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The streame thereof would drive a water-mill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Trebly augmented was his furious mood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With bitter sence of his deepe rooted ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That flames of fire he threw forth from his large nosethril.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His hideous tayle then hurled he about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therewith all enwrapt the nimble thyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his froth-fomy steed, whose courage stout</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Striving to loose the knott that fast him tyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himselfe in streighter bandes too rash implyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to the ground he is perforce constraynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To throw his ryder; who can quickly ryse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From off the earth, with durty blood distaynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that reprochfull fall right fowly he disdaynd;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And fercely tooke his trenchand blade in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which he stroke so furious and so fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nothing seemd the puissaunce could withstand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his crest the hardned yron fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But his more hardned crest was armd so well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That deeper dint therein it would not make;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet so extremely did the buffe him quell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from thenceforth he shund the like to take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when he saw them come he did them still forsake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The knight was wroth to see his stroke beguyld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And smot againe with more outrageous might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But backe againe the sparcling steele recoyld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And left not any marke where it did light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if in Adamant rocke it had beene pight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The beast, impatient of his smarting wound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of so fierce and forcible despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thought with his winges to stye above the ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But his late wounded wing unserviceable found.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then full of griefe and anguish vehement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He lowdly brayd, that like was never heard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from his wide devouring oven sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A flake of fire, that flashing in his beard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him all amazd, and almost made afeard:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The scorching flame sore swinged all his face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through his armour all his body seard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he could not endure so cruell cace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thought his armes to leave, and helmet to unlace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Not that great Champion of the antique world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom famous Poetes verse so much doth vaunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hath for twelve huge labours high extold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So many furies and sharpe fits did haunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When him the poysoned garment did enchaunt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Centaures blood, and bloody verses charmd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As did this knight twelve thousand dolours daunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom fyrie steele now burnt, that erst him arm'd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That erst him goodly arm'd, now most of all him harm'd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Faynt, wearie, sore, emboyled, grieved, brent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With heat, toyle, wounds, armes, smart, and inward fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That never man such mischiefes did torment:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Death better were; death did he oft desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But death will never come when needes require.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom so dismayd when that his foe beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He cast to suffer him no more respire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But gan his sturdy sterne about to weld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And him so strongly stroke, that to the ground him feld.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It fortuned, (as fayre it then befell)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behynd his backe, unweeting, where he stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of auncient time there was a springing well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From which fast trickled forth a silver flood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of great vertues, and for med'cine good:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whylome, before that cursed Dragon got</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That happy land, and all with innocent blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Defyld those sacred waves, it rightly hot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The well of life, ne yet his vertues had forgot:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For unto life the dead it could restore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And guilt of sinfull crimes cleane wash away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those that with sicknesse were infected sore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It could recure; and aged long decay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Renew, as one were borne that very day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both Silo this, and Jordan, did excell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And th' English Bath, and eke the German Spau;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne can Cephise, nor Hebrus, match this well:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the same the knight back overthrowen fell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now gan the golden Phoebus for to steepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His fierie face in billowes of the west,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his faint steedes watred in Ocean deepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles from their journall labours they did rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When that infernall Monster, having kest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His wearie foe into that living well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan high advaunce his broad discoloured brest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above his wonted pitch, with countenance fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And clapt his yron wings as victor he did dwell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when his pensive Lady saw from farre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great woe and sorrow did her soule assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As weening that the sad end of the warre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gan to highest God entirely pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That feared chaunce from her to turne away:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With folded hands, and knees full lowly bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All night shee watcht, ne once adowne would lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her dainty limbs in her sad dreriment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But praying still did wake, and waking did lament.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The morrow next gan earely to appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Titan rose to runne his daily race;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But earely, ere the morrow next gan reare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the sea faire Titans deawy face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Up rose the gentle virgin from her place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And looked all about, if she might spy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her loved knight to move his manly pace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she had great doubt of his safety,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since late she saw him fall before his enimy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last she saw where he upstarted brave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the well, wherein he drenched lay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Eagle, fresh out of the ocean wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where he hath lefte his plumes all hory gray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And deckt himselfe with fethers youthly gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like Eyas hauke up mounts unto the skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His newly-budded pineons to assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And marveiles at himselfe stil as he flies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So new this new-borne knight to battell new did rise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when the damned feend so fresh did spy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No wonder if he wondred at the sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doubted whether his late enimy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It were, or other new supplied knight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He now, to prove his late-renewed might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">High brandishing his bright deaw-burning blade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his crested scalp so sore did smite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to the scull a yawning wound it made:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The deadly dint his dulled sences all dismaid.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I wote not whether the revenging steele</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were hardned with that holy water dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein he tell, or sharper edge did feele,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or his baptized hands now greater grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or other secret vertue did ensew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Els never could the force of fleshly arme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne molten mettall, in his blood embrew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For till that stownd could never wight him harme</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By subtilty, nor slight, nor might, nor mighty charme.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The cruell wound enraged him so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That loud he yelled for exceeding paine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As hundred ramping Lions seemd to rore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom ravenous hunger did thereto constraine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan he tosse aloft his stretched traine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therewith scourge the buxome aire so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to his force to yielden it was faine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought his sturdy strokes might stand afore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That high trees overthrew, and rocks in peeces tore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The same advauncing high above his head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sharpe intended sting so rude him smott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to the earth him drove, as stricken dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne living wight would have him life behott:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The mortall sting his angry needle shott</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quite through his shield, and in his shoulder seasd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where fast it stucke, ne would thereout be gott:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The griefe thereof him wondrous sore diseasd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne might his rancling paine with patience be appeasd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But yet, more mindfull of his honour deare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then of the grievous smart which him did wring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From loathed soile he can him lightly reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strove to loose the far infixed sting:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when in vaine he tryde with struggeling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Inflam'd with wrath, his raging blade he hefte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strooke so strongly, that the knotty string</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his huge taile he quite a sonder clefte;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Five joints thereof he hewd, and but the stump him lefte.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hart cannot thinke what outrage and what cries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With fowle enfouldred smoake and flashing fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hell-bred beast threw forth unto the skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all was covered with darknesse dire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, fraught with rancour and engorged yre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He cast at once him to avenge for all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, gathering up himselfe out of the mire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his uneven wings, did fiercely fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his sunne-bright shield, and grypt it fast withall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Much was the man encombred with his hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In feare to lose his weapon in his paw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne wist yett how his talaunts to unfold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor harder was from Cerberus greedy jaw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To plucke a bone, then from his cruell claw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To reave by strength the griped gage away:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrise he assayd it from his foote to draw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thrise in vaine to draw it did assay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It booted nought to thinke to robbe him of his pray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho, when he saw no power might prevaile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His trusty sword he cald to his last aid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith he fiersly did his foe assaile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And double blowes about him stoutly laid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That glauncing fire out of the yron plaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As sparkles from the Andvile use to fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When heavy hammers on the wedge are swaid:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith at last he forst him to unty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One of his grasping feete, him to defend thereby.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The other foote, fast fixed on his shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whenas no strength nor stroks mote him constraine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To loose, ne yet the warlike pledge to yield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He smott thereat with all his might and maine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nought so wondrous puissaunce might sustaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the joint the lucky steele did light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made such way that hewd it quite in twaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The paw yett missed not his minisht might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But hong still on the shield, as it at first was pight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For griefe thereof and divelish despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From his infernall fournace forth he threw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Huge flames that dimmed all the hevens light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enrold in duskish smoke and brimstone blew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As burning Aetna from his boyling stew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth belch out flames, and rockes in peeces broke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ragged ribs of mountaines molten new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enwrapt in coleblacke clowds and filthy smoke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all the land with stench and heven with horror choke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The heate whereof, and harmefull pestilence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So sore him noyd, that forst him to retire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A little backeward for his best defence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To save his body from the scorching fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he from hellish entrailes did expire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It chaunst, (eternall God that chaunce did guide)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he recoiled backeward, in the mire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His nigh foreweried feeble feet did slide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And downe he fell, with dread of shame sore terrifide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There grew a goodly tree him faire beside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Loaden with fruit and apples rosy redd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As they in pure vermilion had been dide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof great vertues over-all were redd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For happy life to all which thereon fedd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And life eke everlasting did befall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great God it planted in that blessed stedd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his Almighty hand, and did it call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tree of life, the crime of our first fathers fall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In all the world like was not to be fownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save in that soile, where all good things did grow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And freely sprong out of the fruitfull grownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As incorrupted Nature did them sow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that dredd Dragon all did overthrow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another like faire tree eke grew thereby,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof whoso did eat, eftsoones did know</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both good and ill. O mournfull memory!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That tree through one mans fault hath doen us all to dy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>From that first tree forth flowd, as from a well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A trickling streame of Balme, most soveraine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dainty deare, which on the ground still fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And overflowed all the fertile plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As it had deawed bene with timely raine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Life and long health that gracious ointment gave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And deadly wounds could heale, and reare againe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sencelesse corse appointed for the grave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into that same he fell, which did from death him save.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For nigh thereto the ever damned Beast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Durst not approch, for he was deadly made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And al that life preserved did detest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet he it oft adventur'd to invade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By this the drouping day-light gan to fade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yield his rowme to sad succeeding night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who with her sable mantle gan to shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The face of earth and wayes of living wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And high her burning torch set up in heaven bright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When gentle Una saw the second fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her deare knight, who, weary of long fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And faint through losse of blood, moov'd not at all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But lay, as in a dreame of deepe delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besmeard with pretious Balme, whose vertuous might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did heale his woundes, and scorching heat alay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Againe she stricken was with sore affright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for his safetie gan devoutly pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And watch the noyous night, and wait for joyous day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The joyous day gan early to appeare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fayre Aurora from the deawy bed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of aged Tithone gan herselfe to reare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With rosy cheekes, for shame as blushing red:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her golden locks for hast were loosely shed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About her cares, when Una her did marke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Clymbe to her charet, all with flowers spred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From heven high to chace the chearelesse darke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With mery note her lowd salutes the mounting larke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then freshly up arose the doughty knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All healed of his hurts and woundes wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did himselfe to battaile ready dight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose early foe awaiting him beside</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To have devourd, so soone as day he spyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When now he saw himselfe so freshly reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if late fight had nought him damniryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He woxe dismaid, and gan his fate to feare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nathlesse with wonted rage he him advaunced neare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And in his first encounter, gaping wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He thought attonce him to have swallowd quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rusht upon him with outragious pryde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who him rencountring fierce, as hauke in flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perforce rebutted backe. The weapon bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Taking advantage of his open jaw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ran through his mouth with so importune might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That deepe emperst his darksom hollow maw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, back retyrd, his life blood forth with all did draw.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So downe he fell, and forth his life did breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That vanisht into smoke and cloudes swift;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So downe he fell, that th'earth him underneath</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did grone, as feeble so great load to lift;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So downe he fell, as an huge rocky clift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose false foundacion waves have washt away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With dreadfull poyse is from the mayneland rift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rolling downe great Neptune doth dismay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So downe he fell, and like an heaped mountaine lay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The knight him selfe even trembled at his fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So huge and horrible a masse it seemd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his deare Lady, that beheld it all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Durst not approch for dread which she misdeemd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yet at last, whenas the direfull feend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She saw not stirre, off-shaking vaine affright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She nigher drew, and saw that joyous end:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then God she praysd, and thankt her faithfull knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That had atchievde so great a conquest by his might.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-12" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Fayre Una to the Redcrosse Knight</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Betrothed is with joy:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though false Duessa, it to barre,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Her false sleightes doe imploy.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Behold! I see the haven nigh at hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which I meane my wearie course to bend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vere the maine shete, and beare up with the land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which afore is fayrly to be kend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seemeth safe from storms that may offend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There this fay re virgin wearie of her way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Must landed bee, now at her journeyes end;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There eke my feeble barke a while may stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till mery wynd and weather call her thence away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Scarsely had Phoebus in the glooming East</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yett harnessed his fyrie-footed teeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne reard above the earth his flaming creast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When the last deadly smoke aloft did steeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That signe of last outbreathed life did seeme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the watchman on the castle-wall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who thereby dead that balefull Beast did deeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to his Lord and Lady lowd gan call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tell how he had scene the Dragons fatall fall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Uprose with hasty joy, and feeble speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That aged Syre, the lord of all that land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And looked forth, to weet if trew indeed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those tydinges were, as he did understand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which whenas trew by tryall he out fond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He badd to open wyde his brasen gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which long time had beene shut, and out of hond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proclaymed joy and peace through all his state;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For dead now was their foe, which them forrayed late.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then gan triumphant Trompets sownd on hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sent to heven the ecchoed report</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of their new joy, and happie victory</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst him, that had them long opprest with tort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fast imprisoned in sieged fort.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then all the people, as in solemne feast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To him assembled with one full consort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rejoycing at the fall of that great beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From whose eternall bondage now they were releast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Forth came that auncient Lord, and aged Queene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arayd in antique robes downe to the grownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sad habiliments right well beseene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A noble crew about them waited rownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of sage and sober peres, all gravely gownd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom far before did march a goodly band</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of tall young men, all hable armes to sownd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But now they laurell braunches bore in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glad signe of victory and peace in all their land.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Unto that doughtie Conquerour they came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him before themselves prostrating low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their Lord and Patrone loud did him proclame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at his feet their lawrell boughes did throw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone after them, all dauncing on a row,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The comely virgins came, with girlands dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As fresh as flowres in medow greene doe grow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When morning deaw upon their leaves doth light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in their handes sweet Timbrels all upheld on hight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And them before the fry of children yong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their wanton sportes and childish mirth did play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the Maydens sownding tymbrels song</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In well attuned notes a joyous lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made delightfull musick all the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill they came where that faire virgin stood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As fayre Diana in fresh sommers day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beholdes her nymphes enraung'd in shady wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some wrestle, some do run, some bathe in christall flood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So she beheld those maydens meriment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With chearefull vew; who, when to her they came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Themselves to ground with gracious humblesse bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her ador'd by honorable name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lifting to heven her everlasting fame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then on her head they sett a girlond greene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And crowned her twixt earnest and twixt game:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, in her self-resemblance well beseene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did seeme, such as she was, a goodly maiden Queene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And after all the raskall many ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Heaped together in rude rablement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see the face of that victorious man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom all admired as from heaven sent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gazd upon with gaping wonderment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when they came where that dead Dragon lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stretcht on the ground in monstrous large extent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sight with ydle feare did them dismay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne durst approch him nigh to touch, or once assay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Some feard, and fledd; some feard, and well it faynd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One, that would wiser seeme then all the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Warnd him not touch, for yet perhaps remaynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some lingring life within his hollow brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or in his wombe might lurke some hidden nest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of many Dragonettes, his fruitfull seede:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another saide, that in his eyes did rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet sparckling fyre, and badd thereof take heed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another said, he saw him move his eyes indeed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One mother, whenas her foolehardy chyld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did come too neare, and with his talants play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Halfe dead through feare, her litle babe revyld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to her gossibs gan in counsell say;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"How can I tell, but that his talants may</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet scratch my sonne, or rend his tender hand?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So diversly them selves in vaine they fray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles some more bold to measure him nigh stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To prove how many acres he did spred of land.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus flocked all the folke him rownd about;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles that hoarie king, with all his traine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being arrived where that champion stout</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After his foes defeasaunce did remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him goodly greetes, and fayre does entertayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With princely gifts of yvory and gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thousand thankes him yeeldes for all his paine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then when his daughter deare he does behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her dearely doth imbrace, and kisseth manifold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And after to his Pallace he them bringes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With shaumes, and trompets, and with Clarions sweet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the way the joyous people singes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with their garments strowes the paved street;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence mounting up, they fynd purveyaunce meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all, that royall Princes court became;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the floore was underneath their feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bespredd with costly scarlott of great name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On which they lowly sitt, and fitting purpose frame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>What needes me tell their feast and goodly guize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which was nothing riotous nor vaine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What needes of dainty dishes to devize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of comely services, or courtly trayne?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My narrow leaves cannot in them contayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The large discourse of roiall Princes state.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was their manner then but bare and playne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For th'antique world excesse and pryde did hate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such proud luxurious pompe is swollen up but late.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then, when with meates and drinkes of every kinde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their fervent appetites they quenched had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That auncient Lord gan fit occasion finde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of straunge adventures, and of perils sad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which in his travell him befallen had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For to demaund of his renowmed guest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who then with utt'rance grave, and count'nance sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From poynt to poynt, as is before exprest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Discourst his voyage long, according his request.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Great pleasure, mixt with pittifull regard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That godly King and Queene did passionate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whyles they his pittifull adventures heard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That oft they did lament his lucklesse state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And often blame the too importune fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That heapd on him so many wrathfull wreakes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For never gentle knight, as he of late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So tossed was in fortunes cruell freakes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the while salt teares bedeawd the hearers cheaks.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then sayd that royall Pere in sober wise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Deare Sonne, great beene the evils which ye bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From first to last in your late enterprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I note whether praise or pitty more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For never living man, I weene, so sore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In sea of deadly daungers was distrest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But since now safe ye seised have the shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And well arrived are, (high God be blest!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let us devize of ease and everlasting rest."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ah dearest Lord!" said then that doughty knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Of ease or rest I may not yet devize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For by the faith which I to armes have plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I bownden am streight after this emprize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As that your daughter can ye well advize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Backe to retourne to that great Faery Queene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her to serve sixe yeares in warlike wize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst that proud Paynim king that works her teene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore I ought crave pardon, till I there have beene."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Unhappy falls that hard necessity,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Quoth he) "the troubler of my happy peace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And vowed foe of my felicity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne I against the same can justly preace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But since that band ye cannot now release,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor doen undo, (for vowes may not be vayne)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone as the terme of those six yeares shall cease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye then shall hither backe retourne agayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The marriage to accomplish vowd betwixt you twayn.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Which, for my part, I covet to performe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In sort as through the world I did proclame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That who-so kild that monster most deforme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him in hardy battayle overcame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should have mine onely daughter to his Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of my kingdome heyre apparaunt bee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore, since now to thee perteynes the same</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By dew desert of noble chevalree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both daughter and eke kingdome lo! I yield to thee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then forth he called that his daughter fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fairest Un', his onely daughter deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His onely daughter and his only hayre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who forth proceeding with sad sober cheare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As bright as doth the morning starre appeare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the East, with flaming lockes bedight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tell that dawning day is drawing neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the world does bring long-wished light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So faire and fresh that Lady shewd herselfe in sight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So faire and fresh, as freshest flowre in May;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she had layd her mournefull stole aside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And widow-like sad wimple throwne away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith her heavenly beautie she did hide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles on her wearie journey she did ride;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on her now a garment she did weare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All lilly white, withoutten spot or pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemd like silke and silver woven neare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But neither silke nor silver therein did appeare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The blazing brightnesse of her beauties beame r</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And glorious light of her sunshyny face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tell were as to strive against the streame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My ragged rimes are all too rude and bace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her heavenly lineaments for to enchace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne wonder; for her own deare loved knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All were she daily with himselfe in place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did wonder much at her celestial sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oft had he scene her faire, but never so faire dight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So fairely dight when she in presence came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She to her Syre made humble reverence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bowed low, that her right well became,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And added grace unto her excellence:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who with great wisedome and grave eloquence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus gan to say But, eare he thus had sayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With flying speede, and seeming great pretence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came running in, much like a man dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A messenger with letters, which his message sayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All in the open hall amazed stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At suddeinnesse of that unwary sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wondred at his breathlesse hasty mood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he for nought would stay his passage right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till fast before the king he did alight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where falling flat great humblesse he did make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And kist the ground whereon his foot was pight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then to his handes that writt he did betake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which he disclosing read thus, as the paper spake:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"To thee, most mighty king of Eden fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her greeting sends in these sad lines addrest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wofull daughter and forsaken heyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that great Emperour of all the West;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bids thee be advized for the best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere thou thy daughter linck in holy band</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of wedlocke to that new unknowen guest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he already plighted his right hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto another love, and to another land.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"To me, sad mayd, or rather widow sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He was affyaunced long time before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sacred pledges he both gave, and had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">False erraunt knight, infamous, and forswore!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Witnesse the burning Altars, which he swore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And guilty heavens of his bold perjury;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which though he hath polluted oft of yore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet I to them for judgement just doe fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And them conjure t'avenge this shamefull injury.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Therefore, since mine he is, or free or bond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or false or trew, or living or else dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withhold, O soverayne Prince! your hasty hond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From knitting league with him, I you aread;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne weene my right with strength adowne to tread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through weaknesse of my widowhed or woe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For truth is strong her rightfull cause to plead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shall finde friends, if need requireth soe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So bids thee well to fare, Thy neither friend nor foe, <i>Fidessa</i>."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When he these bitter byting wordes had red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The tydings straunge did him abashed make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That still he sate long time astonished,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As in great muse, ne word to creature spake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last his solemn silence thus he brake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With doubtfull eyes fast fixed on his guest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Redoubted knight, that for myne only sake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy life and honor late adventurest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let nought be hid from me that ought to be exprest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"What meane these bloody vowes and idle threats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throwne out from womanish impatient mynd?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What hevens? what altars? what enraged heates,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here heaped up with termes of love unkynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My conscience cleare with guilty bands would bynd?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">High God be witnesse that I guiltlesse ame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if yourselfe, Sir knight, ye faulty fynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or wrapped be in loves of former Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With cryme doe not it cover, but disclose the same."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom the Redcrosse knight this answere sent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"My Lord, my king, be nought hereat dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till well ye wote by grave intendiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What woman, and wherefore, doth me upbrayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With breach of love and loialty betrayd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It was in my mishaps, as hitherward</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I lately traveild, that un wares I strayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of my way, through perils straunge and hard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That day should faile me ere I had them all declard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"There did I find, or rather I was fownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of this false woman that Fidessa hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fidessa hight the falsest Dame on grownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most false Duessa, royall richly dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That easy was t'inveigle weaker sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who by her wicked arts and wylie skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Too false and strong for earthly skill or might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unwares me wrought unto her wicked will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to my foe betrayd when least I feared ill."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then stepped forth the goodly royall Mayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on the ground herselfe prostrating low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sober countenance thus to him sayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"O! pardon me, my soveraine Lord, to sheow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The secret treasons, which of late I know</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To have bene wrought by that false sorceresse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee, onely she, it is, that earst did throw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This gentle knight into so great distresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That death him did awaite in daily wretchednesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And now it seemes, that she suborned hath</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This crafty messenger with letters vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To worke new woe and improvided scath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By breaking of the band betwixt us twaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein she used hath the praclicke paine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of this false footman, clokt with simplenesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whome if ye please for to discover plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye shall him Archimago find, I ghesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The falsest man alive: who tries, shall find no lesse.'</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The king was greatly moved at her speach;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, all with suddein indignation fraight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bad on that Messenger rude hands to reach.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones the Card, which on his state did wait,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Attacht that faytor false, and bound him strait,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who seeming sorely chauffed at his band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As chained beare whom cruell dogs doe bait,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With ydle force did faine them to withstand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And often semblaunce made to scape out of their hand.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But they him layd full low in dungeon deepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bound him hand and foote with yron chains;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with continual watch did warely keepe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who then would thinke that by his subtile trains</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He could escape fowle death or deadly pains?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus, when that Princes wrath was pacifide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan renew the late forbidden bains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the knight his daughter deare he tyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sacred rites and vowes for ever to abyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His owne two hands the holy knotts did knitt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none but death for ever can divide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His owne two hands, for such a turne most fitt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The housling fire did kindle and provide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And holy water thereon sprinckled wide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At which the bushy Teade a groome did light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sacred lamp in secret chamber hide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where it should not be quenched day nor night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For feare of evil fates, but burnen ever bright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then gan they sprinckle all the posts with wine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made great feast to solemnize that day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They all perfumde with frankincense divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And precious odours fetcht from far away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the house did sweat with great aray:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the while sweete Musicke did apply</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her curious skill the warbling notes to play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To drive away the dull Melancholy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whiles one sung a song of love and jollity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>During the which there was an heavenly noise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Heard sownd through all the Pallace pleasantly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as it had bene many an Angels voice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Singing before th'eternall majesty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In their trinall triplicities on hye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yett wist no creature whence that hevenly sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proceeded, yet each one felt secretly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himselfe thereby refte of his sences meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ravished with rare impression in his sprite.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Great joy was made that day of young and old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And solemn e feast proclaymd throughout the land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That their exceeding merth may not be told:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Suffice it heare by signes to understand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The usuall joyes at knitting of loves band.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrise happy man the knight himselfe did hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Possessed of his Ladies hart and hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever, when his eie did her behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His heart did seeme to melt in pleasures manifold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her joyous presence and sweet company</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In full content he there did long enjoy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne wicked envy, ne vile gealosy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His deare delights were hable to annoy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, swimming in that sea of blisfull joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He nought forgott how he whilome had sworne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In case he could that monstrous beast destroy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto his Faery Queene backe to retourne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which he shortly did, and Una left to mourne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now, strike your sailes, yee jolly Mariners,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For we be come unto a quiet rode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where we must land some of our passengers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And light this weary vessell of her lode:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here she a while may make her safe abode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till she repaired have her tackles spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wants supplide; And then againe abroad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On the long voiage whereto she is bent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well may she speede, and fairely finish her intent!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="book-2" epub:type="part z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Containing the Legend of Sir Guyon, or of Temperance</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="book-2-prologue" epub:type="prologue">
				<p>
					<span>Right well I wote, most mighty Soveraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all this famous antique history</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of some th'aboundance of an ydle braine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will judged be, and painted forgery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rather then matter of just memory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith none that breatheth living aire does know</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where is that happy land of Faery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which I so much doe vaunt, yet no where show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But vouch antiquities, which no body can know.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But let that man with better sence advize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of the world least part to us is red;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And daily how, through hardy enterprize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Many great Regions are discovered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to late age were never mentioned.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who ever heard of th' Indian Peru?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or who in venturous vessell measured</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Amazon huge river, now found trew?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or fruitfullest Virginia who did ever vew?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet all these were, when no man did them know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet have from wisest ages hidden beene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And later times thinges more unknowne shall show.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why then should witlesse man so much misweene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nothing is but that which he hath scene?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What if within the Moones fayre shining spheare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What if in every other starre unseene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of other worldes he happily should heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He wonder would much more; yet such to some appeare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Of Faery lond yet if he more inquyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By certein signes, here sett in sondrie place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He may it fynd; ne let him then admyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yield his sence to bee too blunt and bace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That no'te without an hound fine footing trace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thou, O fayrest Princesse under sky!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In this fayre mirrhour maist behold thy face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thine owne realmes in lond of Faery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in this antique ymage thy great auncestry.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The which O! pardon me thus to enfold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In covert vele, and wrap in shadowes light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That feeble eyes your glory may behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which ells could not endure those beames bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But would bee dazled with exceeding light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O! pardon, and vouchsafe with patient care</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The brave adventures of this faery knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The good Sir Guyon, gratiously to heare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In whom great rule of Temp'raunce goodly doth appeare.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Guyon, by Archimage abusd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The Redcrosse knight awaytes;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Findes mordant and Amavia slaine</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With Pleasures poisoned baytes.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>That conning Architect of cancred guyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom Princes late displeasure left in bands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For falsed letters, and suborned wyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone as the Redcrosse knight he understands</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To beene departed out of Eden landes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To serve againe his soveraine Elfin Queene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His artes he moves, and out of caytives handes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himselfe he frees by secret meanes unseene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His shackles emptie lefte, himselfe escaped cleene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And forth he fares, full of malicious mynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To worken mischiefe, and avenging woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where ever he that godly knight may fynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His onely hart-sore, and his onely foe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith Una now he algates must forgoe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom his victorious handes did earst restore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To native crowne and kingdom late ygoe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where she enjoy es sure peace for evermore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As wetherbeaten ship arryv'd on happie shore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Him therefore now the object of his spight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And deadly food he makes: him to offend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By forged treason or by open fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He seekes, of all his drifte the aymed end:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereto his subtile engins he does bend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His praftick witt and his fayre fyled tonge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With thousand other sleightes; for well he kend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His credit now in doubtfull ballaunce hong:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For hardly could bee hurt who was already stong.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Still as he went he craftie stales did lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With cunning traynes him to entrap unwares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And privy spyals plast in all his way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weete what course he takes, and how he fares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To ketch him at a vauntage in his snares.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But now so wise and wary was the knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By tryall of his former harmes and cares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he descryde and shonned still his slight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fish that once was caught new bait wil hardly byte.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nath'lesse th' Enchaunter would not spare his payne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hope to win occasion to his will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when he long awaited had in vayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He chaungd his mynd from one to other ill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For to all good he enimy was still.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the way him fortuned to meete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayre marching underneath a shady hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A goodly knight, all armd in harnesse meete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That from his head no place appeared to his feete.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His carriage was full comely and upright;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His countenance demure and temperate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yett so sterne and terrible in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That cheard his friendes, and did his foes amate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He was an Elfin borne of noble state</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mickle worship in his native land;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well could he tourney, and in lists debate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And knighthood tooke of good Sir Huons hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When with king Oberon he came to Faery land.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Him als accompanyd upon the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A comely Palmer, clad in black attyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of rypest yeares, and heares all hoarie gray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with a staffe his feeble steps did stire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least his long way his aged limbes should tire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, if by lookes one may the mind aread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He seemd to be a sage and sober syre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever with slow pace the knight did lead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who taught his trampling steed with equall steps to tread.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such whenas Archimago them did view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He weened well to worke some uncouth wyle:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones untwisting his deceiptfull clew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan to weave a web of wicked guyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, with faire countenance and flattring style</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To them approching, thus the knight bespake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Fayre sonne of Mars, that seeke with warlike spoyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And great atchiev'ments, great your selfe to make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vouchsafe to stay your steed for humble misers sake."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He stayd his steed for humble misers sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And badd tell on the tenor of his playnt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who feigning then in every limb to quake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through inward feare, and seeming pale and faynt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With piteous mone his percing speach gan paynt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Deare Lady! how shall I declare thy cace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom late I left in languorous constraynt?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would God! thy selfe now present were in place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tell this ruefull tale: thy sight could win thee grace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Or rather would, O! would it so had chaunst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That you, most noble Sir, had present beene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When that lewd rybauld, with vyle lust advaunst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Laid first his filthie hands on virgin cleene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To spoyle her dainty corps, so faire and sheene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As on the earth, great mother of us all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With living eye more fayre was never scene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of chastity and honour virginall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Witnes, ye heavens, whom she in vaine to help did call.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"How may it be," sayd then the knight halfe wroth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"That knight should knighthood ever so have shent?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"None but that saw," (quoth he) "would weene for troth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How shamefully that Mayd he did torment:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her looser golden lockes he rudely rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And drew her on the ground; and his sharpe sword</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against her snowy brest he fiercely bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And threatned death with many a bloodie word</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tounge hates to tell the rest that eye to see abhord."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith amoved from his sober mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"And lives he yet," (said he) "that wrought this aft?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doen the heavens afford him vitall food?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"He lives," (quoth he) "and boasteth of the fad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne yet hath any knight his courage crackt."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Where may that treachour then," (sayd he) "be found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or by what meanes may I his footing tract?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"That shall I shew," (sayd he) "as sure as hound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stricken Deare doth chalenge by the bleeding wound."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He stayd not lenger talke, but with fierce yre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And zealous haste away is quickly gone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke that knight, where him that crafty Squyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Supposd to be. They do arrive anone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where sate a gentle Lady all alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With garments rent, and heare discheveled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wringing her handes, and making piteous mone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her swollen eyes were much disfigured,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her faire face with teares was fowly blubbered.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The knight, approching nigh, thus to her said:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Fayre Lady, through fowle sorrow ill bedight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great pitty is to see you thus dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And marre the blossom of your beauty bright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For-thy appease your griefe and heavy plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tell the cause of your conceived payne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, if he live that hath you doen despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He shall you doe dew recompence agayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or els his wrong with greater puissance maintained 1</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when she heard, as in despightfull wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She wilfully her sorrow did augment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And offred hope of comfort did despise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her golden lockes most cruelly she rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And scratcht her face with ghastly dreriment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne would she speake, ne see, ne yet be scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But hid her visage, and her head downe bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Either for grievous shame, or for great teene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if her hart with sorrow had transfixed beene:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Till her that Squyre bespake: "Madame, my liefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Gods deare love be not so wilfull bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But doe vouchsafe now to receive reliefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which good fortune doth to you present.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For what bootes it to weepe and to wayment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When ill is chaunst, but doth the ill increase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the weake minde with double woe torment?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When she her Squyre heard speake, she gan appease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her voluntarie paine, and feele some secret ease.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoone she said; "Ah! gentle trustie Squyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What comfort can I, wofull wretch, conceave?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or why should ever I henceforth desyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see faire heavens face, and life not leave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith that false Traytour did my honour reave?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"False traytour certes," (saide the Faerie knight)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"I read the man, that ever would deceave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A gentle Lady, or her wrong through might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death were too litle paine for such a fowle despight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But now, fayre Lady, comfort to you make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And read who hath ye wrought this shamefull plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That short revenge the man may overtake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where-so he be, and soone upon him light.'</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Certes," (saide she) "I wote not how he hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But under him a gray steede he did wield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose sides with dapled circles weren dight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upright he rode, and in his silver shield</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He bore a bloodie Crosse that quartred all the field."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Now by my head," (saide Guyon) "much I muse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How that same knight should doe so fowle amis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ever gentle Damzell so abuse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, may I boldly say, he surely is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A right good knight, and trew of word ywis:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I present was, and can it witnesse well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When armes he swore, and streight did enterpris</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th'adventure of the Errant damozell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which he hath great glory wonne, as I heare tell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Nathlesse he shortly shall againe be tryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fairely quit him of th'imputed blame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Els, be ye sure, he dearely shall abyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or make you good amendment for the same:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All wrongs have mendes, but no amendes of shame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now therefore, Lady, rise out of your paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And see the salving of your blotted name."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full loth she seemd thereto, but yet did faine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For she was inly glad her purpose so to gaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her purpose was not such as she did faine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne yet her person such as it was scene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But under simple shew, and semblant plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lurkt false Duessa secretly unseene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As a chaste Virgin that had wronged beene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So had false Archimago her disguysd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To cloke her guile with sorrow and sad teene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke himselfe had craftily devisd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be her Squire, and do her service well aguisd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her, late forlorne and naked, he had found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where she did wander in waste wildernesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lurking in rockes and caves far under ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with greene mosse cov'ring her nakednesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hide her shame and loathly filthinesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith her Prince Arthur of proud ornaments</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And borrowd beauty spoyld. Her nathelesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th'enchaunter finding fit for his intents</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did thus revest, and deckt with dew habiliments.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For all he did was to deceive good knights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And draw them from pursuit of praise and fame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To slug in slouth and sensuall delights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And end their daies with irrenowmed shame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now exceeding griefe him overcame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see the Redcrosse thus advaunced hye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore this craftie engine he did frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against his praise to stirre up enmitye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of such, as vertues like mote unto him allye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So now he Guyon guydes an uncouth way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through woods and mountaines, till they came at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into a pleasant dale that lowly lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Betwixt two hils, whose high heads overplast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The valley did with coole shade overcast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through midst thereof a little river rold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which there sate a knight with helme unlaste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himselfe refreshing with the liquid cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After his travell long and labours manifold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Lo! yonder he," cryde Archimage alowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"That wrought the shamefull facl which I did shew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now he doth himselfe in secret shrowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To fly the vengeaunce for his outrage dew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But vaine; for ye shall dearely do him rew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So God ye speed and send you good successe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which we far off will here abide to vew."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So they him left inflam'd with wrathfulnesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That streight against that knight his speare he did addresse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who, seeing him from far so fierce to pricke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His warlike armes about him gan embrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the rest his ready speare did sticke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, when as still he saw him towards pace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan rencounter him in equall race.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They bene ymett, both ready to affrap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When suddeinly that warriour gan abace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His threatned speare, as if some new mishap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had him betide, or hidden danger did entrap;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And cryde, "Mercie, Sir knight! and mercie, Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For mine offence and heedelesse hardiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That had almost committed crime abhord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with reprochfull shame mine honour shent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles cursed steele against that badge I bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sacred badge of my Redeemers death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which on your shield is set for ornament!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But his fierce foe his steed could stay uneath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, prickt with courage kene, did cruell battell breath.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, when he heard him speake, streight way he knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His errour; and, himselfe inclyning, sayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ah! deare Sir Guyon, well becommeth you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But me behoveth rather to upbrayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose hastie hand so far from reason strayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That almost it did haynous violence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On that fayre ymage of that heavenly Mayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That decks and armes your shield with faire defence:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your court'sie takes on you anothers dew offence."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So beene they both at one, and doen upreare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their bevers bright each other for to greet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Goodly comportaunce each to other beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And entertaine themselves with court'sies meet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then said the Redcrosse knight; "Now mote I weet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir Guyon, why with so fierce saliaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fell intent, ye did at earst me meet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For sith I know your goodly governaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great cause, I weene, you guided, or some uncouth chaunce."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Certes," (said he) "well mote I shame to tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fond encheason that me hither led.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A false infamous faitour late befell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me for to meet, that seemed ill bested,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And playnd of grievous outrage, which he red</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A knight had wrought against a Ladie gent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to avenge he to this place me led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where you he made the marke of his intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now is fled: foule shame him follow wher he went!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So can he turne his earnest unto game,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through goodly handling and wise temperaunce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By this his aged Guide in presence came;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, soone as on that knight his eye did glaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones of him had perfect cognizaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith him in Faery court he late avizd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sayd; "Fayre sonne, God give you happy chaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that deare Crosse uppon your shield devizd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherewith above all knights ye goodly seeme aguizd!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Joy may you have, and everlasting fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of late most hard atchiev'ment by you donne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which enrolled is your glorious name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In heavenly Regesters above the Sunne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where you a Saint with Saints your seat have wonne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wretched we, where ye have left your marke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Must now anew begin like race to ronne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">God guide thee, Guyon, well to end thy warke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the wished haven bring thy weary barke!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Palmer," him answered the Redcrosse knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"His be the praise that this atchiev'ment wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who made my hand the organ of his might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More then goodwill to me attribute nought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all I did, I did but as I ought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But you, faire Sir, whose pageant next ensewes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well mote yee thee, as well can wish your thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That home ye may report thrise happy newes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For well ye worthy bene for worth and gentle thewes.'</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So courteous conge both did give and take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With right hands plighted, pledges of good will.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Guyon forward gan his voyage make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his blacke Palmer, that him guided still:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still he him guided over dale and hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his steedy staffe did point his way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His race with reason, and with words his will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From fowle intemperaunce he ofte did stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And suffred not in wrath his hasty steps to stray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In this faire wize they traveild long yfere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through many hard assayes which did betide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which he honour still away did beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And spred his glory through all countryes wide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last, as chaunst them by a forest side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To passe, for succour from the scorching ray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They heard a ruefull voice, that dearnly cride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With percing shriekes and many a dolefull lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which to attend awhile their forward steps they stay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But if that carelesse hevens," (quoth she) "despise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The doome of just revenge, and take delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see sad pageaunts of mens miseries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As bownd by them to live in lives despight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet can they not warne death from wretched wight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Come, then; come soone; come sweetest death, to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And take away this long lent loathed light:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sharpe be thy wounds, but sweete the medicines be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That long captived soules from weary thraldome free.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But thou, sweete Babe, whom frowning froward fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath made sad witnesse of thy fathers fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith heven thee deignes to hold in living state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long maist thou live, and better thrive withall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then to thy lucklesse parents did befall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Live thou; and to thy mother dead attest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That cleare she dide from blemish criminall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy litle hands embrewd in bleeding brest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loe! I for pledges leave. So give me leave to rest."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that a deadly shrieke she forth did throw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That through the wood re-echoed againe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after gave a grone so deepe and low</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemd her tender heart was rent in twaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or thrild with point of thorough-piercing paine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As gentle Hynd, whose sides with cruell steele</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through launched, forth her bleeding life does raine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles the sad pang approching shee does feele,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Braies out her latest breath, and up her eies doth seele.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when that warriour heard, dismounting straidt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From his tall steed, he rusht into the thick,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soone arrived where that sad pourtraict</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of death and dolour lay, halfe dead, halfe quick;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In whose white alabaster brest did stick</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A cruell knife that made a griesly wownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From which forth gusht a stream of gore blood thick,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all her goodly garments staind arownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And into a deepe sanguine dide the grassy grownd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Pitifull spectacle of deadly smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beside a bubling fountaine low she lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which shee increased with her bleeding hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the cleane waves with purple gore did ray:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Als in her lap a lovely babe did play</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His cruell sport, in stead of sorrow dew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For in her streaming blood he did embay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His litle hands, and tender joints embrew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pitifull spectacle, as ever eie did vew!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Besides them both, upon the soiled gras</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dead corse of an armed knight was spred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose armour all with blood besprincled was;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His ruddy lips did smyle, and rosy red</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did paint his chearefull cheekes, yett being ded;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seemd to have beene a goodly personage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now in his freshest flowre of lusty-hed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fitt to inflame faire Lady with loves rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that fiers fate did crop the blossome of his age.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when the good Sir Guyon did behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His hart gan wexe as starke as marble stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his fresh blood did frieze with fearefull cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all his sences seemd berefte attone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last his mighty ghost gan deepe to grone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Lion, grudging in his great disdaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mournes inwardly, and makes to him selfe mone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Til ruth and fraile affection did constraine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His stout courage to stoupe, and shew his inward paine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Out of her gored wound the cruell steel</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He lightly snatcht, and did the floodgate stop</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his faire garment; then gan softly feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her feeble pulse, to prove if any drop</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of living blood yet in her veynes did hop:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when he felt to move, he hoped faire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To call backe life to her forsaken shop.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So well he did her deadly wounds repaire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That at the last shee gan to breath out living aire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which he perceiving greatly gan rejoice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And goodly counsell, that for wounded hart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is meetest med'cine, tempred with sweete voice:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ay me! deare Lady, which the ymage art</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of ruefull pitty and impatient smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What direfull chaunce, armd with avenging fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or cursed hand, hath plaid this cruell part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus fowle to hasten your untimely date?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speake, O dear Lady, speake! help never comes too late."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith her dim eie-lids she up gan reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which the drery death did sitt as sad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As lump of lead, and made darke clouds appeare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when as him, all in bright armour clad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before her standing she espied had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one out of a deadly dreame affright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She weakely started, yet she nothing drad:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Streight downe againe herselfe, in great despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She groveling threw to ground, as hating life and light.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The gentle knight her soone with carefull paine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uplifted light, and softly did uphold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrise he her reard, and thrise she sunck againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till he his armes about her sides gan fold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to her said: "Yet, if the stony cold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have not all seized on your frozen hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let one word fall that may your grief unfold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tell the secrete of your mortall smart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He oft finds present helpe who does his griefe impart."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then, casting up a deadly looke, full low</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee sight from bottome of her wounded brest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after, many bitter throbs did throw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With lips full pale and foltring tong opprest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These words she breathed forth from riven chest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Leave, ah! leave off, whatever wight thou bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To lett a weary wretch from her dew rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And trouble dying soules tranquilitee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take not away, now got, which none would give to me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ah! far be it," (said he) "Deare dame, fro mee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hinder soule from her desired rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or hold sad life in long captivitee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all I seeke is but to have redrest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bitter pangs that doth your heart infest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tell then, O Lady! tell what fatall priefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath with so huge misfortune you opprest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I may cast to compas your reliefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or die with you in sorrow, and partake your griefe."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With feeble hands then stretched forth on hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As heven accusing guilty of her death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with dry drops congealed in her eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In these sad wordes she spent her utmost breath:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Heare then, O man! the sorrowes that uneath</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My tong can tell, so far all sence they pas.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Loe! this dead corpse, that lies here underneath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gentlest knight, that ever on greene gras</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gay steed with spurs did pricke, the good Sir Mortdant was</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Was, (ay the while, that he is not so now!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Lord, my love, my deare Lord, my deare love!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So long as hevens just with equall brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vouchsafed to behold us from above.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One day, when him high corage did emmove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As wont ye knightes to seeke adventures wilde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He pricked forth his puissant force to prove.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me then he left enwombed of this childe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This luckles childe, whom thus ye see with blood defild.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Him fortuned (hard fortune ye may ghesse)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To come, where vile Acrasia does wonne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Acrasia, a false enchaunteresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That many errant knightes hath fowle fordonne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within a wandring Island, that doth ronne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stray in perilous gulfe, her dwelling is.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayre Sir, if ever there ye travell, shonne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cursed land where many wend amis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And know it by the name: it hight the <i>Bowre of blis</i>.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Her blis is all in pleasure, and delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith she makes her lovers dronken mad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then with words, and weedes, of wondrous might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On them she workes her will to uses bad:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My liefest Lord she thus beguiled had;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he was flesh: (all flesh doth frayltie breed)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when I heard to beene so ill bestad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weake wretch, I wrapt myselfe in Palmers weed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cast to seek him forth through danger and great dreed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Now had fayre Cynthia by even tournes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full measured three quarters of her yeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thrise three tymes had fild her crooked homes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whenas my wombe her burdein would forbeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bad me call Lucina to me neare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lucina came; a manchild forth I brought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The woods, the nymphes, my bowres, my midwives, weare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hard help at need! So deare thee, babe, I bought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet nought too dear I deemd, while so my deare I sought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Him so I sought; and so at last I fownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where him that witch had thralled to her will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In chaines of lust and lewde desyres ybownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so transformed from his former skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That me he knew not, nether his owne ill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till, through wise handling and faire governaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I him recured to a better will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Purged from drugs of fowle intemperaunce:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then meanes I gan devise for his deliveraunce.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Which when the vile Enchaunteresse perceiv'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How that my Lord from her I would reprive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With cup thus charmd him parting she deceivd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">'<i>Sad verse, give death to him that death does give,</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">
						<i>And losse of love to her that loves to live,</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><i>So soone as Bacchus with the Nymphe does tin eke!</i>'</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So parted we, and on our journey drive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till, coming to this well, he stoupt to drincke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The charme fulfild, dead suddeinly he downe did sincke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Which when I, wretch"—Not one word more she sayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But breaking off the end for want of breath.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And slyding soft, as downe to sleepe her layd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ended all her woe in quiet death.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seeing, good Sir Guyon could uneath</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From teares abstayne; for griefe his hart did grate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from so heavie sight his head did wreath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Accusing fortune, and too cruell fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which plonged had faire Lady in so wretched state.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then turning to his Palmer said; "Old syre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behold the ymage of mortalitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And feeble nature cloth'd with fleshly tyre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When raging passion with fierce tyranny</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Robs reason of her dew regalitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And makes it servaunt to her basest part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The strong it weakens with infirmitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with bold furie armes the weakest hart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The strong through pleasure soonest falles, the weake through smart."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But temperaunce" (said he) "with golden squire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Betwixt them both can measure out a meane;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nether to melt in pleasures whott desyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor frye in hartlesse griefe and dolefull tene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrise happy man, who fares them both atweene!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But sith this wretched woman overcome</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of anguish, rather then of crime, hath bene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Reserve her cause to her eternall doome;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, in the meane, vouchsafe her honorable toombe."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Palmer," quoth he, "death is an equall doome</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To good and bad, the common In of rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But after death the try-all is to come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When best shall bee to them that lived best;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But both alike, when death hath both supprest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Religious reverence doth buriall teene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which whoso wants, wants so much of his rest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all so great shame after death I weene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As selfe to dyen bad, unburied bad to beene."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So both agree their bodies to engrave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The great earthes wombe they open to the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with sad Cypresse seemely it embrave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, covering with a clod their closed eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They lay therein their corses tenderly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bid them sleepe in everlasting peace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, ere they did their utmost obsequy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir Guyon, more affecion to increace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bynempt a sacred vow, which none should ay releace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The dead knights sword out of his sheath he drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which he cutt a lock of all their heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which medling with their blood and earth he threw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the grave, and gan devoutly sweare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Such and such evil God on Guyon reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And worse and worse, young Orphane, be thy payne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If I, or thou, dew vengeaunce doe forbeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till guiltie blood her guerdon doe obtayne!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So shedding many teares they closd the earth agayne.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Babes bloudie handes may not be clensd:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The face of golden Meane</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her sisters, two Extremities,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Strive her to banish cleane.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thus when Sir Guyon with his faithful guyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had with dew rites and dolorous lament</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The end of their sad Tragedie uptyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The litle babe up in his armes he hent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who with sweet pleasaunce, and bold blandishment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan smyle on them, that rather ought to weepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As carelesse of his woe, or innocent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that was doen; that ruth emperced deepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In that knightes hart, and wordes with bitter teares did steepe:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ah! lucklesse babe, borne under cruell starre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in dead parents balefull ashes bred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full little weenest thou what sorrowes are</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Left thee for porcion of thy livelyhed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Poore Orphane! in the wild world scattered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As budding braunch rent from the native tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And throwen forth, till it be withered.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such is the state of men: Thus enter we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into this life with woe, and end with miseree!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then, soft himselfe inclyning on his knee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Downe to that well, did in the water weene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(So love does loath disdainefull nicitee)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His guiltie handes from bloody gore to cleene.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He washt them oft and oft, yet nought they beene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all his washing cleaner. Still he strove;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet still the litle hands were bloody scene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which him into great amaz'ment drove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And into diverse doubt his wavering wonder clove.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He wist not whether blott of fowle offence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might not be purgd with water nor with bath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that high God, in lieu of innocence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Imprinted had that token of his wrath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To shew how sore bloodguiltinesse he hat'th;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that the charme and veneme which they dronck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their blood with secret filth infecled hath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being diffused through the senceless tronck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That through the great contagion direful deadly stonck.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom thus at gaze the Palmer gan to bord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With goodly reason, and thus fay re bespake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ye bene right hard amated, gratious Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of your ignorance great merveill make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles cause not well conceived ye mistake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But know, that secret vertues are infusd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In every fountaine, and in everie lake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which who hath skill them rightly to have chusd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To proofe of passing wonders hath full often usd:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Of those, some were so from their sourse indewd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By great Dame Nature, from whose fruitfull pap</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their welheads spring, and are with moisture deawd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which feedes each living plant with liquid sap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And filles with flowres fayre Floraes painted lap:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But other some, by guifte of later grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or by good prayers, or by other hap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had vertue pourd into their waters bace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thenceforth were renowmd, and sought from place to place.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Such is this well, wrought by occasion straunge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to her Nymph befell. Upon a day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As she the woodes with bow and shaftes did raunge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hartlesse Hynd and Robucke to dismay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dan Faunus chaunst to meet her by the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, kindling fire at her faire-burning eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Inflamed was to follow beauties pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chaced her that fast from him did fly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As hynd from her, so she fled from her enimy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"At last, when fayling breath began to faint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saw no meanes to scape, of shame affrayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She set her downe to weepe for sore constraint;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to Diana calling lowd for ayde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her deare besought to let her die a mayd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The goddesse heard; and suddeine, where she sate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Welling out streames of teares, and quite dismayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With stony teare of that rude rustick mate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Transformd her to a stone from stedfast virgins state.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Lo! now she is that stone; from whose two heads,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As from two weeping eyes, fresh streames do flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet colde through feare and old conceived dreads;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet the stone her semblance seemes to show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shapt like a maide, that such ye may her know:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet her vertues in her water byde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For it is chaste and pure as purest snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne lets her waves with any filth be dyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ever, like herselfe, unstayned hath beene tryde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"From thence it comes, that this babes bloody hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May not be clensd with water of this well:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne certes, Sir, strive you it to withstand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But let them still be bloody, as befell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they his mothers innocence may tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As she bequeathd in her last testament;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, as a sacred Symbole, it may dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In her sonnes flesh, to mind revengement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And be for all chaste Dames an endlesse moniment."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He hearkned to his reason, and the childe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uptaking, to the Palmer gave to beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But his sad fathers armes with blood defilde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An heavie load, himselfe did lightly reare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And turning to that place, in which whylearc</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He left his loftie steed with golden sell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And goodly gorgeous barbes, him found not theare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By other accident, that earst befell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He is convaide; but how, or where, here fits not tell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when Sir Guyon saw, all were he wroth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet algates mote he soft himselfe appease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fairely fare on foot, how ever loth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His double burden did him sore disease.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So long they travelled with litle ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that at last they to a Castle came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Built on a rocke adjoyning to the seas:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It was an auncient worke of antique fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wondrous strong by nature, and by skilfull frame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therein three sisters dwelt of sundry sort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The children of one syre by mothers three;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who dying whylome did divide this fort</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To them by equall shares in equall fee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But stryfull mind and diverse qualitee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drew them in partes, and each made others foe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still did they strive and daily disagree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The eldest did against the youngest goe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And both against the middest meant to worken woe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Where when the knight arriv'd, he was right well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Receiv'd, as knight of so much worth became,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of second sister, who did far excell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other two: Medina was her name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A sober sad and comely courteous Dame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who rich arayd, and yet in modest guize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In goodly garments that her well became,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayre marching forth in honorable wize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him at the threshold mett, and well did enterprize.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She led him up into a goodly bowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And comely, courted with meet modestie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne in her speach, ne in her haviour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was lightnesse scene or looser vanitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But gratious womanhood, and gravitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above the reason of her youthly yeares.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her golden lockes she roundly did uptye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In breaded tramels, that no looser heares</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did out of order stray about her daintie eares.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whilest she her selfe thus busily did frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seemely to entertaine her new-come guest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Newes hereof to her other sisters came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who all this while were at their wanton rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Accourting each her frend with lavish fest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They were two knights of perelesse puissaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And famous far abroad for warlike gest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to these Ladies love did countenaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to his mistresse each himselfe strove to advaunce.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He that made love unto the eldest Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was hight Sir Huddibras, an hardy man;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet not so good of deedes as great of name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he by many rash adventures wan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since errant armes to sew he first began:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More huge in strength then wise in workes he was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And reason with foole-hardize over ran;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sterne melancholy did his courage pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And was, for terrour more, all armd in shyning bras.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But he that lov'd the youngest was Sansloy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He, that faire Una late fowle outraged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The most unruly and the boldest boy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ever warlike weapons menaged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all to lawlesse lust encouraged</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through strong opinion of his matchlesse might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought he car'd whom he endamaged</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By tortious wrong, or whom bereav'd of right:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He, now this Ladies Champion, chose for love to fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>These two gay knights, vowd to so diverse loves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each other does envy with deadly hate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And daily warre against his foeman moves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hope to win more favour with his mate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And th'others pleasing service to abate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To magnifie his owne. But when they heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How in that place straunge knight arrived late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both knightes and ladies forth right angry far'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fercely unto battell sterne themselves prepared.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, ere they could proceede unto the place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where he abode, themselves at discord fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cruell combat joynd in middle space:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With horrible assault, and fury fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They heapt huge strokes the scorned life to quell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all on uprore from her settled seat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The house was raysd, and all that in did dwell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seemd that lowde thunder with amazement great</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did rend the ratling skyes with flames of fouldring heat.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The noyse thereof cal'd forth that straunger knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet what dreadfull thing was there in hond;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where whenas two brave knightes in bloody fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With deadly rancour he enraunged fond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His sunbroad shield about his wrest he bond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shyning blade unsheathd, with which he ran</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto that stead, their strife to understond;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at his first arrivall them began</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With goodly meanes to pacific, well as he can.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But they, him spying, both with greedy forse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Attonce upon him ran, and him beset</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With strokes of mortall steele without remorse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on his shield like yron sledges bet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As when a Beare and Tygre, being met</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In cruell fight on Lybicke Ocean wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Espye a traveller with feet surbet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom they in equall pray hope to divide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They stint their strife and him assayle on everie side.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But he, not like a weary traveilere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their sharp assault right boldly did rebut,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And suffred not their blowes to byte him nere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with redoubled buffes them backe did put:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose grieved mindes, which choler did englut,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against themselves turning their wrathfull spight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan with new rage their shieldes to hew and cut;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But still, when Guyon came to part their fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With heavie load on him they freshly gan to smight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As a tall ship tossed in troublous seas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom raging windes, threatning to make the pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the rough rockes, doe diversly disease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Meetes two contrarie billowes by the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her on either side doe sore assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And boast to swallow her in greedy grave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee, scorning both their spights, does make wide way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with her brest breaking the fomy wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Does ride on both their backs, and faire her self doth save.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So boldly he him beares, and rusheth forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Betweene them both by conducl of his blade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wondrous great prowesse and heroick worth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He shewd that day, and rare ensample made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When two so mighty warriours he dismade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Attonce he wards and strikes; he takes and paies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now forst to yield, now forcing to invade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before, behind, and round about him laies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So double was his paines, so double be his praise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Straunge sort of fight, three valiaunt knights to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Three combates joine in one, and to darraine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A triple warre with triple enmitee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All for their Ladies froward love to gaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which gotten was but hate. So love does raine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In stoutest minds, and maketh monstrous warre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He maketh warre, he maketh peace againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yett his peace is but continual jarre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O miserable men, that to him subject arre!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whilst thus they mingled were in furious armes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The faire Medina, with her tresses torne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And naked Brest, in pitty of their harmes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emongst them ran; and, falling them beforne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besought them by the womb which them had born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by the loves which were to them most deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by the knighthood which they sure had sworn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their deadly cruell discord to forbeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to her just conditions of faire peace to heare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But her two other sisters, standing by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her lowd gainsaid, and both their champions bad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pursew the end of their strong enmity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As ever of their loves they would be glad.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet she with pitthy words, and counsell sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still strove their stubborne rages to revoke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That at the last, suppressing fury mad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They gan abstaine from dint of direfull stroke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hearken to the sober speaches which she spoke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ah, puissaunt Lords! what cursed evil Spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or fell Erinnys, in your noble harts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her hellish brond hath kindled with despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stird you up to worke your wilfull smarts?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is this the joy of armes? be these the parts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of glorious knighthood, after blood to thrust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And not regard dew right and just desarts?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vaine is the vaunt, and victory unjust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That more to mighty hands then rightfull cause doth trust.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And were there rightfull cause of difference,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet were not better fayre it to accord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then with bloodguiltinesse to heape offence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mortal vengeaunce joyne to crime abhord?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O! fly from wrath; fly, O my liefest Lord!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sad be the sights, and bitter fruites of warre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thousand furies wait on wrathfull sword;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought the praise of prowesse more doth marre</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then fowle revenging rage, and base contentious jarre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But lovely concord, and most sacred peace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth nourish vertue, and fast friendship breeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weake she makes strong, and strong thing does increace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till it the pitch of highest praise exceeds:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Brave be her warres, and honorable deeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which she triumphes over yre and pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And winnes an Olive girlond for her meeds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be, therefore, O my deare Lords! pacifide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this misseeming discord meekely lay aside."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her gracious words their rancour did appall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And suncke so deepe into their boyling brests,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That downe they lett their cruell weapons fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lowly did abase their lofty crests</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To her faire presence and discrete behests.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then she began a treaty to procure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stablish terms betwixt both their requests,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That as a law for ever should endure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which to observe in word of knights they did assure.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which to confirme, and fast to bind their league,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After their weary sweat and bloody toile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She them besought, during their quiet treague,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into her lodging to repaire awhile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To rest themselves, and grace to reconcile.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They soone consent: so forth with her they fare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where they are well receivd, and made to spoile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Themselves of soiled armes, and to prepare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their minds to pleasure, and their mouths to dainty fare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And those two froward sisters, their faire loves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came with them eke, all were they wondrous loth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fained cheare, as for the time behoves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But could not colour yet so well the troth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that their natures bad appeard in both;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For both did at their second sister grutch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And inly grieve, as doth an hidden moth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The inner garment frett, not th'utter touch:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One thought her cheare too litle, th'other thought too mutch.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Elissa (so the eldest hight) did deeme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such entertainment base, ne ought would eat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought would speake, but evermore did seeme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As discontent for want of merth or meat:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No solace could her Paramour intreat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her once to show, ne court, nor dalliaunce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with bent lowring browes, as she would threat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She scould, and frownd with froward countenaunce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unworthy of faire Ladies comely governaunce.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But young Perissa was of other mynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of disport, still laughing, loosely light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And quite contrary to her sisters kynd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No measure in her mood, no rule of right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But poured out in pleasure and delight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In wine and meats she flowd above the banck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in excesse exceeded her owne might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In sumptuous tire she joyd her selfe to pranck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But of her love too lavish: (litle have she thanck!)</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Fast by her side did sitt the bold Sansloy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fitt mate for such a mincing mineon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who in her loosenesse tooke exceeding joy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might not be found a francker franion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her leawd parts to make companion:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Huddibras, more like a Malecontent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did see and grieve at his bold fashion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hardly could he endure his hardiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yett still he satt, and inly did him selfe torment.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Betwixt them both the faire Medina sate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sober grace and goodly carriage:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With equall measure she did moderate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The strong extremities of their outrage.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That forward paire she ever would asswage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When they would strive dew reason to exceed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that same froward twaine would accorage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of her plenty adde unto their need:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So kept she them in order, and her selfe in heed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus fairely shee attempered her feast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pleas'd them all with meete satiety.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last, when lust of meat and drinke was ceast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She Guyon deare besought of curtesie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tell from whence he came through jeopardy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And whither now on new adventure bownd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who with bold grace, and comely gravity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drawing to him the eies of all arownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From lofty siege began these words aloud to sownd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"This thy demaund, O Lady! doth revive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fresh memory in me of that great Queene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great and most glorious virgin Queene alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with her soveraine power, and scepter shene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All Faery lond does peaceably sustene.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In widest Ocean she her throne does reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That over all the earth it may be scene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As morning Sunne her beames dispredden cleare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in her face faire peace and mercy doth appeare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In her the richesse of all heavenly grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In chiefe degree are heaped up on hye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all, that els this worlds enclosure bace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath great or glorious in mortall eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adornes the person of her Majestye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That men, beholding so great excellence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rare perfection in mortalitye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe her adore with sacred reverence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As th' Idole of her makers great magnificence.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"To her I homage and my service owe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In number of the noblest knightes on ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst whom on me she deigned to bestowe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Order of Maydenhead, the most renownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That may this day in all the world be found.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An yearely solemne feast she wontes to hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The day that first doth lead the yeare around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which all knights of worth and courage bold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Resort, to heare of straunge adventures to be told.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"There this old Palmer shewd himselfe that day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to that mighty Princesse did complaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of grievous mischiefes which a wicked Fay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had wrought, and many whelmd in deadly paine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof he crav'd redresse. My Soveraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose glory is in gracious deeds, and joyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throughout the world her mercy to maintaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones devisd redresse for such annoyes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me, all unfitt for so great purpose, she employes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Now hath faire Phebe with her silver face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrise scene the shadowes of the neather world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith last I left that honorable place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which her roiall presence is enrold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever shall I rest in house nor hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till I that false Acrasia have wonne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whose fowle deedes, too hideous to bee told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I witnesse am, and this their wretched sonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose wofull parents she hath wickedly fordonne."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Tell on, fayre Sir," said she, "that dolefull tale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From which sad ruth does seeme you to restraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That we may pitty such unhappie bale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And learne from pleasures poyson to abstaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">111 by ensample good doth often gayne."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then forward he his purpose gan pursew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And told the story of the mortall payne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Mordant and Amavia did rew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As with lamenting eyes him selfe did lately vew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Night was far spent; and now in Ocean deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Orion, flying fast from hissing snake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His flaming head did hasten for to steep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When of his pitteous tale he end did make:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilst with delight of that he wisely spake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those guestes, beguyled, did beguyle their eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of kindly sleepe that did them overtake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last, when they had markt the chaunged skyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They wist their houre was spent; then each to rest him hyes.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-3" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Vaine Braggadocchio getting Guyons</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Horse, is made the scorne</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of knighthood trew, and is of fayre</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Belphoebe fowle forlorne.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as the morrow fayre with purple beames</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disperst the shadowes of the misty night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Titan, playing on the eastern streames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan cleare the deawy ayre with springing light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir Guyon, mindfull of his vow yplight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uprose from drowsie couch, and him addrest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the journey which he had behight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His puissant armes about his noble brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many-folded shield he bound about his wrest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then, taking Conge of that virgin pure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bloody-handed babe unto her truth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did earnestly committ, and her conjure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In vertuous lore to traine his tender youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all that gentle noriture ensu'th;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that, so soone as ryper yeares he raught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He might, for memory of that dayes ruth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be called Ruddymane; and thereby taught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>T'avenge his Parents death on them that had it wrought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So forth he far'd, as now befell, on foot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith his good steed is lately from him gone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Patience perforce: helplesse what may it boot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To frett for anger, or for griefe to mone?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His Palmer now shall foot no more alone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So fortune wrought, as under greene woodes syde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He lately heard that dying Lady grone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He left his steed without, and speare besyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rushed in on foot to ayd her ere she dyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The whyles a losell wandring by the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One that to bountie never cast his mynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne thought of honour ever did assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His baser brest, but in his kestrell kynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A pleasing vaine of glory he did fynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which his flowing toung and troublous spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gave him great ayd, and made him more inclynd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He, that brave steed there finding ready dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Purloynd both steed and speare, and ran away full light.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now gan his hart all swell in jollity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of him selfe great hope and help conceiv'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That puffed up with smoke of vanity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with selfe-loved personage deceiv'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan to hope of men to be receiv'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For such as he him thought, or faine would bee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But for in court gay portaunce he perceiv'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gallant shew to be in greatest gree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eftsoones to court he cast t'advaunce his first degree.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And by the way he chaunced to espy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One sitting ydle on a sunny banck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To him avaunting in great bravery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Peacocke that his painted plumes doth pranck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He smote his courser in the trembling flanck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to him threatned his hart-thrilling speare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The seely man, seeing him ryde so ranck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ayme at him, fell flatt to ground for feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And crying, "Mercy!" loud, his pitious handes gan reare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereat the Scarcrow wexed wondrous prowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through fortune of his first adventure fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with big thundring voice revyld him lowd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Vile Caytive, vassall of dread and despayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unworthie of the commune breathed ayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why livest thou, dead dog, a lenger day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doest not unto death thyselfe prepayre?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dy, or thyselfe my captive yield for ay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great favour I thee graunt for aunswere thus to stay."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Hold, O deare Lord! hold your dead-doing hand,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then loud he cryde; "I am your humble thrall."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ay wretch," (quoth he) "thy destinies withstand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My wrathfull will, and doe for mercy call.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I give thee life: therefore prostrated fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And kisse my stirrup; that thy homage bee."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Miser threw him selfe, as an Offall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Streight at his foot in base humilitee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cleeped him his liege, to hold of him in fee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So happy peace they made and faire accord.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones this liegeman gan to wexe more bold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when he felt the folly of his Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his owne kind he gan him selfe unfold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he was wylie witted, and growne old</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In cunning sleightes and praclick knavery.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From that day forth he cast for to uphold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His ydle humour with fine flattery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And blow the bellowes to his swelling vanity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Trompart, fitt man for Braggadochio,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To serve at court in view of vaunting eye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vaine-glorious man, when fluttring wind does blow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his light winges, is lifted up to skye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The scorne of knighthood and trew chevalrye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To thinke, without desert of gentle deed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And noble worth, to be advaunced hye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such prayse is shame; but honour, vertues meed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth beare the fayrest flowre in honourable seed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So forth they pas, a well consorted payre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that at length with Archimage they meet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who seeing one, that shone in armour fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On goodly courser thondring with his feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones supposed him a person meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his revenge to make the instrument;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For since the Redcrosse knight he erst did weet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To been with Guyon knitt in one consent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ill, which earst to him, he now to Guyon ment.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And coming close to Trompart gan inquere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of him, what mightie warriour that mote bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That rode in golden sell with single spere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wanted sword to wreake his enmitee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"He is a great adventurer," (said he)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"That hath his sword through hard assay forgone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now hath vowd, till he avenged bee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that despight, never to wearen none:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That speare is him enough to doen a thousand grone."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Th'enchaunter greatly joyed in the vaunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And weened well ere long his will to win,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both his foen with equall foyle to daunt.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho to him louting lowly did begin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To plaine of wronges, which had committed bin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By Guyon, and by that false Redcrosse knight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which two, through treason and deceiptfull gin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had slayne Sir Mordant and his Lady bright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That mote him honour win to wreak so foule despight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith all suddeinly he seemd enraged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And threatned death with dreadfull countenaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if their lives had in his hand beene gaged;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with stiffe force shaking his mortall launce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To let him weet his doughtie valiaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus said: "Old man, great sure shal be thy meed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If, where those knights for feare of dew vengeaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe lurke, thou certainly to mee areed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I may wreake on them their hainous hatefull deed."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Certes, my Lord," (said he) "that shall I soone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And give you eke good helpe to their decay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But mote I wisely you advise to doon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Give no ods to your foes, but doe purvay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your selfe of sword before that bloody day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For they be two the prowest knights on grownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oft approv'd in many hard assay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke of surest steele that may be fownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do arme your self against that day, them to confownd."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Dotard," (said he) "let be thy deepe advise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seemes that through many yeares thy wits thee faile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that weake eld hath left thee nothing wise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Els never should thy judgement be so frayle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To measure manhood by the sword or mayle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is not enough fowre quarters of a man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withouten sword or shield, an hoste to quayle?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou litle wotest what this right-hand can:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speake they which have beheld the battailes which it wan."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The man was much abashed at his boast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet well he wist that whoso would contend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With either of those knightes on even coast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should neede of all his armes him to defend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet feared least his boldnesse should offend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When Braggadocchio saide; "Once I did sweare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When with one sword seven knightes I brought to end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thenceforth in battaile never sword to beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But it were that which noblest knight on earth doth weare."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Perdy, Sir knight," saide then th'enchaunter blive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"That shall I shortly purchase to your hond;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For now the best and noblest knight alive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Prince Arthur is, that wonnes in Faerie lond:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He hath a sword that flames like burning brond.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The same by my device I undertake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall by to morrow by thy side be fond."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At which bold word that boaster gan to quake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wondred in his minde what mote that Monster make.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He stay'd not for more bidding, but away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was suddein vanished out of his sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Northerne winde his wings did broad display</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At his commaund, and reared him up light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From off the earth to take his aerie flight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They look't about, but nowhere could espye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Trad: of his foot: then dead through great affright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They both nigh were, and each bad other flye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both fled attonce, ne ever backe retourned eye;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Till that they come unto a forrest greene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which they shrowd themselves from causeles feare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet feare them followes still where so they beene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each trembling leafe and whistling wind they heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As ghastly bug, does greatly them affeare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet both doe strive their fearefulnesse to faine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last they heard a home that shrilled cleare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throughout the wood that ecchoed againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made the forrest ring, as it would rive in twaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eft through the thicke they heard one rudely rush,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With noyse whereof he from his loftie steed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Downe fell to ground, and crept into a bush,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hide his coward head from dying dreed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Trompart stoutly stayd to taken heed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of what might hap. Eftsoone there stepped foorth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A goodly Ladie clad in hunters weed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemd to be a woman of great worth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by her stately portance borne of heavenly birth.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her face so faire as flesh it seemed not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But hevenly pourtraict of bright Angels hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cleare as the skye, withouten blame or blot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through goodly mixture of complexions dew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in her cheekes the vermeill red did shew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like roses in a bed of lillies shed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which ambrosiall odours from them threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gazers sence with double pleasure fed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hable to heale the sicke, and to revive the ded.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In her faire eyes two living lamps did flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kindled above at th' hevenly makers light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And darted fyrie beames out of the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So passing persant, and so wondrous bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That quite bereav'd the rash beholders sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In them the blinded god his lustfull fyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To kindle oft assayd, but had no might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, with dredd Majestic and awfull yre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She broke his wanton darts, and quenched bace desyre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her yvorie forhead, full of bountie brave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like a broad table did it selfe dispred;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Love his loftie triumphes to engrave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And write the battailes of his great godhed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All good and honour might therein be red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For there their dwelling was. And, when she spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sweete wordes like dropping honny she did shed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And twixt the perles and rubins softly brake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A silver sound, that heavenly musicke seemd to make.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Upon her eyelids many Graces sate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under the shadow of her even browes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Working belgardes and amorous retrate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And everie one her with a grace endowes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And everie one with meekenesse to her bowes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So glorious mirrhour of celestiall grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soveraine moniment of mortall vowes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How shall frayle pen descrive her heavenly face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For feare, through want of skill, her beauty to disgrace?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So faire, and thousand thousand times more faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She seemd, when she presented was to sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And was yclad, for heat of scorching aire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All in a silken Camus lilly whight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Purfled upon with many a folded plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which all above besprinckled was throughout</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With golden aygulets, that glistred bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like twinckling starres; and all the skirt about</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was hemd with golden fringe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Below her ham her weed did somewhat trayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her streight legs most bravely were embayld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In gilden buskins of costly Cordwayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All bard with golden bendes, which were entayld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With curious antickes, and full fayre aumayld:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before, they fastned were under her knee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In a rich jewel, and therein entrayld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The ends of all the knots, that none might see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How they within their fouldings close enwrapped bee:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like two faire marble pillours they were scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which doe the temple of the Gods support,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom all the people decke with girlands greene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And honour in their festivall resort;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those same with stately grace and princely port</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She taught to tread, when she herselfe would grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with the woody Nymphes when she did play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or when the flying Libbard she did chace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She could them nimbly move, and after fly apace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And in her hand a sharpe bore-speare she held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at her backe a bow and quiver gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stuft with steele-headed dartes, wherewith she queld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The salvage beastes in her victorious play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Knit with a golden bauldricke, which forelay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Athwart her snowy brest, and did divide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her daintie paps; which, like young fruit in May,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now little gan to swell, and being tide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through her thin weed their places only signifide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her yellow lockes, crisped like golden wyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About her shoulders weren loosely shed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, when the winde emongst them did inspyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They waved like a penon wyde dispred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And low behinde her backe were scattered:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, whether art it were or heedlesse hap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As through the flouring forrest rash she fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In her rude heares sweet flowres themselves did lap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And flourishing fresh leaves and blossoms did enwrap.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such as Diana by the sandy shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of swift Eurotas, or on Cynthus greene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where all the Nymphes have her unwares forlore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wandreth alone with bow and arrowes keene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke her game: Or as that famous Queene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Amazons, whom Pyrrhus did destroy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The day that first of Priame she was scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did shew her selfe in great triumphant joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To succour the weake state of sad afflicted Troy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such when as hartlesse Trompart her did vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He was dismayed in his coward minde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doubted whether he himselfe should shew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or fly away, or bide alone behinde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both feare and hope he in her face did finde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When she at last him spying thus bespake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Hayle, Groome! didst not thou see a bleeding Hynde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose right haunch earst my stedfast arrow strake?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou didst, tell me, that I may her overtake."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Wherewith reviv'd, this answere forth he threw:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"O Goddesse, (for such I thee take to bee)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For nether doth thy face terrestriall shew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor voyce sound mortall; I avow to thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such wounded beast as that I did not see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith earst into this forrest wild I came.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But mote thy goodlyhed forgive it mee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weete which of the gods I shall thee name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That unto thee dew worship I may rightly frame."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom she thus but ere her words ensewd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the bush her eye did suddein glaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which vaine Braggadocchio was mewd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saw it stirre: she lefte her percing launce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And towards gan a deadly shafte advaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In mind to marke the beast. At which sad stowre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Trompart forth stept to stay the mortall chaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out crying; "O! what ever hevenly powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or earthly wight thou be, withhold this deadly howre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"O! stay thy hand; for yonder is no game</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thy fiers arrowes, them to exercize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But loe! my Lord, my liege, whose warlike name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is far renowmd through many bold emprize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now in shade he shrowded yonder lies."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She staid: with that he crauld out of his nest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth creeping on his caitive hands and thies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, standing stoutly up, his lofty crest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did fiercely shake, and rowze as comming late from rest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As fearfull fowle, that long in secret cave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For dread of soring hauke her selfe hath hid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor caring how, her silly life to save,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She her gay painted plumes disorderid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeing at last her selfe from daunger rid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Peepes forth, and soone renews her native pride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She gins her feathers fowle disfigured</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Prowdly to prune, and sett on every side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She shakes off shame, ne thinks how erst she did her hide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So when her goodly visage he beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan himselfe to vaunt: but, when he vewd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those deadly tooles which in her hand she held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone into other fitts he was transmewd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till she to him her gracious speach renewd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"All haile, Sir knight! and well may thee befall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As all the like, which honor have pursewd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through deeds of armes and prowesse martiall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All vertue merits praise, but such the most of all."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom he thus: "O fairest under skie!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Trew be thy words, and worthie of thy praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That warlike feats doest highest glorifie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therein I have spent all my youthly daies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many battailes fought and many fraies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throughout the world, wher-so they might be found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Endevoring my dreaded name to raise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above the Moone, that fame may it resound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In her eternall tromp, with laurell girlond cround.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But what art thou, O Lady! which doest raunge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In this wilde forest, where no pleasure is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doest not it for joyous court exchaunge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emongst thine equall peres, where happy blis</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all delight does raigne, much more then this?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There thou maist love, and dearly loved be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And swim in pleasure, which thou here doest mis:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There maist thou best be scene, and best maist see:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wood is fit for beasts, the court is fitt for thee."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Whoso in pompe of prowd estate" (quoth she)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Does swim, and bathes him selfe in courtly blis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Does waste his dayes in darke obscuritee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in oblivion ever buried is;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where ease abownds yt's eath to doe amis:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But who his limbs with labours, and his mynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behaves with cares, cannot so easy mis.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abroad in armes, at home in studious kynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who seekes with painfull toile shall honor soonest find</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"In woods, in waves, in warres, she wonts to dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wil be found with perill and with paine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne can the man that moulds in ydle cell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto her happy mansion attaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before her gate high God did Sweate ordaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wakefull watches ever to abide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But easy is the way and passage plaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To pleasures pallace: it may soone be spide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And day and night her dores to all stand open wide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"In Princes court" The rest she would have sayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that the foolish man, fild with delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or her sweete words that all his sence dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with her wondrous beauty ravisht quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan burne in filthy lust; and, leaping light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thought in his bastard armes her to embrace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that she, swarving backe, her Javelin bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against him bent, and fiercely did menace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So turned her about, and fled away apace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when the Pesaunt saw, amazd he stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And grieved at her flight; yet durst he nott</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pursew her steps through wild unknowen wood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besides he feard her wrath, and threatned shott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles in the bush he lay, not yett forgott:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne car'd he greatly for her presence vayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But turning said to Trompart; "What fowle blott</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is this to knight, that Lady should agayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Depart to woods untoucht, and leave so proud disdayne."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Perdy," (said Trompart) "lett her pas at will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least by her presence daunger mote befall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For who can tell (and sure I feare it ill)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that shee is some powre celestiall?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For whiles she spake her great words did appall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My feeble corage, and my heart oppresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That yet I quake and tremble over-all."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"And I," (said Braggadocchio) "thought no lesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When first I heard her horn sound with such ghastlinesse,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"For from my mothers wombe this grace I have</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me given by eternall destiny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That earthly thing may not my corage brave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dismay with feare, or cause one foot to flye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But either hellish feends, or powres on hye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which was the cause, when earst that home I heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weening it had beene thunder in the skye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I hid my selfe from it, as one affeard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, when I other knew, my self I boldly reard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But now, for feare of worse that may betide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let us soone hence depart." They soone agree:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So to his steed he gott, and gan to ride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one unfitt therefore, that all might see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He had not trayned bene in chevalree.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which well that valiaunt courser did discerne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he despisd to tread in dew degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But chaufd and fom'd with corage fiers and sterne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to be easd of that base burden still did erne.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-4" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Guyon does Furor bind in chaines</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And stops Occasion:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Delivers Phedon, and therefore</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">By Strife is rayled upon.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In brave poursuitt of honorable deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There is I know not (what) great difference</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Betweene the vulgar and the noble seed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which unto things of valorous pretence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seemes to be borne by native influence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As feates of armes, and love to entertaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But chiefly skill to ride seemes a science</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proper to gentle blood: some others faine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To menage steeds, as did this vaunter, but in vaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But he, the rightfull owner of that steede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who well could menage and subdew his pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles on foot was forced for to yeed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that blacke Palmer, his most trusty guide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who suflfred not his wandring feete to slide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when strong passion, or weake fleshlinesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would from the right way seeke to draw him wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He would, through temperaunce and stedfastnesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Teach him the weak to strengthen, and the strong suppresse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It fortuned, forth faring oo his way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He saw from far, or seemed for to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some troublous uprore or contentious fray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereto he drew in hast it to agree.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A mad man, or that feigned mad to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drew by the heare along upon die grownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A handsom stripling with great crueltee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom sore he bett, and gor'd with many a wownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That cheekes with teares, and sydes with blood, did all abownd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And him behynd a wicked Hag did stalke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In ragged robes and filthy disaray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her other leg was lame, that she no'te walke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But on a stafre her feeble steps did stay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her lockes, that loathly were and hoarie gray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Grew all afore, and loosely hongonrold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bat all behinde was bald, and worne away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none thereof could ever taken hold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke her face ill-favourd, full of wrinckles old.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And ever as she went her toting did</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In fbwfc reproch, and termes of vile despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Provoking him, br her outrageous faikr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To heape more vengeance on that wretched wight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">she might him stones, whcrwith to smite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">her staffe, though it her one leg were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whhouten which die could not goe upright;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne any evill meanes she did forbcarc,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That might him move to wrath, and iiiiligiulioa reare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The noble Guyon, mov'd with great remorse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Approching, first the Hag did thrust away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after, adding more impetuous forse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mighty hands did on the madman lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pluckt him backe; who, all on fire streight way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against him turning all his fell intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With beastly brutish rage gan him assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And smott, and bitt, and kickt, and scratcht, and rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And did he wist not what in his avengement.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And sure he was a man of mickle might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had he had governaunce it well to guyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when the frantick fitt inflamd his spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His force was vaine, and strooke more often wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then at the aymed marke which he had eyde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oft himselfe he chaunst to hurt unwares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whylest reason, blent through passion, nought descryde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, as a blindfold Bull, at randon fares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And where he hits nought knowes, and whom he hurts nought cares.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His rude assault and rugged handeling</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Straunge seemed to the knight, that aye with foe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In fayre defence and goodly menaging</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of armes was wont to fight; yet nathemoe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was he abashed now, not fighting so;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But more enfierced through his currish play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him sternly grypt, and hailing to and fro,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To overthrow him strongly did assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But overthrew himselfe unwares, and lower lay:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And being downe the villein sore did beate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bruze with clownish fistes his manly face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the Hag, with many a bitter threat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still cal'd upon to kill him in the place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With whose reproch, and odious menace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The knight emboyling in his haughtie hart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Knitt all his forces, and gan soone unbrace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His grasping hold: so lightly did upstart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drew his deadly weapon to maintaine his part.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when the Palmer saw, he loudly cryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Not so, O Guyon! never thinke that so</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Monster can be maistred or destroyd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He is not, ah! he is not such a foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As steele can wound, or strength can overthroe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That same is Furor, cursed cruel wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That unto knighthood workes much shame and woe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that same Hag, his aged mother, hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Occasion; the roote of all wrath and despight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"With her, whoso will raging Furor tame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Must first begin, and well her amenage:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First her restraine from her reprochfull blame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evill meanes, with which she doth enrage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her frantick sonne, and kindles his corage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, when she is withdrawne or strong withstood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It's eath his ydle fury to aswage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And calme the tempest of his passion wood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bankes are overflowne when stopped is the flood."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith Sir Guyon left his first emprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, turning to that woman, fast her hent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By the hoare lockes that hong before her eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the ground her threw: yet n'ould she stent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her bitter rayling and foule revilement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But still provokt her sonne to wreake her wrong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But nathelesse he did her still torment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, catching hold of her ungratious tonge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereon an yron lock did fasten firme and strong.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then, whenas use of speach was from her reft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With her two crooked handes she signes did make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And beckned him, the last help she had left;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he that last left helpe away did take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both her handes fast bound unto a stake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she note stirre. Then gan her sonne to flye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full fast away, and did her quite forsake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Guyon after him in hast did hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And soone him overtooke in sad perplexitye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In his strong armes he stifly him embraste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who him gainstriving nought at all prevaild;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all his power was utterly defaste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And furious fitts at earst quite weren quaild:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oft he re'nforst, and oft his forces fayld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet yield he would not, nor his rancor slack.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then him to ground he cast, and rudely hayld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both his hands fast bound behind his backe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And both his feet in fetters to an yron racke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With hundred yron chaines he did him bind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hundred knots, that did him sore constraine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet his great yron teeth he still did grind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And grimly gnash, threatning revenge in vaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His burning eyen, whom bloody strakes did staine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stared full wide, and threw forth sparkes of fyre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And more for ranck despight then for great paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shakt his long locks colourd like copper-wyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bitt his tawny beard to shew his raging yre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus when as Guyon Furor had captivd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turning about he saw that wretched Squyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom that mad man of life nigh late deprivd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lying on ground, all soild with blood and myre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom whenas he perceived to respyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan to comfort, and his woundes to dresse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being at last recured, he gan inquyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What hard mishap him brought to such distresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made that caytives thrall, the thrall of wretchednesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With hart then throbbing, and with watry eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Fayre Sir" (quoth he) "what man can shun the hap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hidden lyes unwares him to surpryse?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Misfortune waites advantage to entrap</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The man most wary in her whelming lap:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So me weake wretch, of many weakest one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unweeting and unware of such mishap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She brought to mischiefe through Occasion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where this same wicked villein did me light upon.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"It was a faithlesse Squire, that was the sourse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all my sorrow and of these sad teares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With whom from tender dug of commune nourse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Attonce I was upbrought; and eft, when yeares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More rype us reason lent to chose our Peares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our selves in league of vowed love wee knitt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which we long time, without gealous feares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or faultie thoughts, contynewd as was fitt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for my part, I vow, dissembled not a whitt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"It was my fortune, commune to that age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To love a Lady fayre of great degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which was borne of noble parentage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And set in highest seat of dignitee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet seemd no lesse to love then lov'd to bee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long I her serv'd, and found her faithfull still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever thing could cause us disagree.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Love, that two harts makes one, makes eke one will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each strove to please, and others pleasure to fulfill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"My friend, hight Philemon, I did partake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all my love and all my privitie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who greatly joyous seemed for my sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gratious to that Lady as to mee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever wight that mote so welcome bee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he to her, withouten blott or blame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever thing that she could think or see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But unto him she would impart the same.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O wretched man, that would abuse so gentle Dame!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"At last such grace I found, and meanes I wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I that Lady to my spouse had wonne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Accord of friendes, consent of Parents sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Affyaunce made, my happinesse begonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There wanted nought but few rites to be donne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which mariage make: that day too farre did see me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most joyous man, on whom the shining Sunne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did shew his face, my selfe I did esteeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that my falser friend did no less joyous deeme.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But ear that wished day his beame disclosd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He, either envying my toward good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or of him selfe to treason ill disposd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One day unto me came in friendly mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And told for secret, how he understood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Lady, whom I had to me assynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had both distaind her honorable blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the faith which she to me did bynd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore wisht me stay till I more truth should fynd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"The gnawing anguish, and sharp gelosy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which his sad speach infixed in my brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ranckled so sore, and festred inwardly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That my engreeved mind could find no rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that the truth thereof I did out wrest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him besought, by that same sacred band</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Betwixt us both, to counsell me the best:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He then with solemne oath and plighted hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Assurd, ere long the truth to let me understand.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ere long with like againe he boorded mee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saying, he now had boulted all the floure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that it was a groome of base degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which of my love was partener Paramoure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who used in a darkesome inner bowre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her oft to meete: which better to approve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He promised to bring me at that howre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When I should see that would me nearer move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drive me to withdraw my blind abused love.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"This gracelesse man, for furtherance of his guile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did court the handmayd of my Lady deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, glad t'embosome his affection vile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did all she might more pleasing to appeare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One day, to worke her to his will more neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He woo'd her thus: Pryene, (so she hight,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What great despight doth fortune to thee beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus lowly to abase thy beautie bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it should not deface all others lesser light?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But if she had her least helpe to thee lent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T'adorne thy forme according thy desart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their blazing pride thou wouldest soone have blent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And staynd their prayses with thy least good part;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne should faire Claribell with all her art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho' she thy Lady be, approch thee neare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For proofe thereof, this evening, as thou art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Aray thyselfe in her most gorgeous geare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I may more delight in thy embracement deare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"The Mayden, proud through praise and mad through love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him hearkned to, and soone herselfe aray'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles to me the treachour did remove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His craftie engin; and, as he had sayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me leading, in a secret corner layd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sad speclatour of my Tragedie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where left, he went, and his owne false part playd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disguised like that groome of base degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom he had feignd th'abuser of my love to bee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Eftsoones he came unto th'appointed place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with him brought Pryene, rich arayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Claribellaes clothes. Her proper face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I not descerned in that darkesome shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But weend it was my love with whom he playd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah God! what horrour and tormenting griefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My hart, my handes, mine eies, and all assayd!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me liefer were ten thousand deathes priefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then wounde of gealous worme, and shame of such repriefe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"I home retourning, fraught with fowle despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chawing vengeaunce all the way I went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone as my loathed love appeard in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With wrathfull hand I slew her innocent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That after soone I dearely did lament;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, when the cause of that outrageous deede</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Demaunded, I made plaine and evident,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her faultie Handmayd, which that bale did breede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Confest how Philemon her wrought to chaunge her weede.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Which when I heard, with horrible affright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hellish fury all enragd, I sought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon myselfe that vengeable despight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To punish: yet it better first I thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wreake my wrath on him that first it wrought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Philemon, false faytour Philemon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I cast to pay that I so dearely bought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of deadly drugs I gave him drink anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And washt away his guilt with guilty potion.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Thus heaping crime on crime, and griefe on griefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To losse of love adjoyning losse of frend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I meant to purge both with a third mischiefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in my woes beginner it to end:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was Pryene; she did first offend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She last should smart: with which cruell intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When I at her my murdrous blade did bend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She fled away with ghastly dreriment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I, poursewing my fell purpose, after went.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Feare gave her winges, and rage enforst my flight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through woods and plaines so long I did her chace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till this mad man, whom your victorious might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath now fast bound, me met in middle space.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As I her, so he me poursewd apace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shortly overtooke: I, breathing yre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sore chauffed at my stay in such a cace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with my heat kindled his cruell fyre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which kindled once, his mother did more rage inspyre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Betwixt them both they have me doen to dye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through wounds, and strokes, and stubborne handeling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That death were better then such agony</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As griefe and fury unto me did bring;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which in me yet stickes the mortall sting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That during life will never be appeasd!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When he thus ended had his sorrowing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said Guyon; "Squyre, sore have ye beene diseasd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all your hurts may soone through temperance be easd."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then gan the Palmer thus; "Most wretched man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to affections does the bridle lend!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In their beginning they are weake and wan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But soone through suffrance growe to fearefull end:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles they are weake, betimes with them contend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, when they once to perfect strength do grow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strong warres they make, and cruell battry bend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst fort of Reason, it to overthrow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wrath, gelosy, griefe, love, this Squyre have laide thus low.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Wrath, gealosie, griefe, love, do thus expell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wrath is a fire; and gealosie a weede;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Griefe is a flood; and love a monster fell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fire of sparkes, the weede of little seede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The flood of drops, the Monster filth did breede:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But sparks, seed, drops, and filth, do thus delay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sparks soone quench, the springing seed outweed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The drops dry up, and filth wipe cleane away:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So shall wrath, gealosy, griefe, love, die and decay."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Unlucky Squire," (saide Guyon) "sith thou hast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Falne into mischiefe through intemperaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Henceforth take heede of that thou now hast past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And guyde thy waies with warie governaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least worse betide thee by some later chaunce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But read how art thou nam'd, and of what kin?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Phaon I hight," (quoth he) "and do advaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mine auncestry from famous Coradin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who first to rayse our house to honour did begin."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus as he spake, lo! far away they spyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A varlet ronning towardes hastily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose flying feet so fast their way applyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That round about a cloud of dust did fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, mingled all with sweate, did dim his eye.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He soone approched, panting, breathlesse, whot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all so soyld that none could him descry:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His countenaunce was bold, and bashed not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Guyons lookes, but scornefull eyeglaunce at him shot.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Behind his backe he bore a brasen shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which was drawen faire, in colours fit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A flaming fire in midst of bloody field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And round about the wreath this word was writ,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><i>Burnt I doe burne</i>. Right well beseemed it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be the shield of some redoubted knight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his hand two dartes, exceeding flit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And deadly sharp, he held, whose heads were dight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In poyson and in blood of malice and despight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When he in presence came, to Guyon first</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He boldly spake; "Sir knight, if knight thou bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abandon this forestalled place at erst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For feare of further harme, I counsell thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or bide the chaunce at thine own jeopardee."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The knight at his great boldnesse wondered;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, though he scornd his ydle vanitee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet mildly him to purpose answered;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For not to grow of nought he it conjectured.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Varlet, this place most dew to me I deeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yielded by him that held it forcibly:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But whence should come that harme, which thou dost seeme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To threat to him that mindes his chaunce t'abye?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Perdy," (sayd he) "here comes, and is hard by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A knight of wondrous powre and great assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That never yet encountred enemy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But did him deadly daunt, or fowle dismay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne thou for better hope, if thou his presence stay."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"How hight he then," (sayd Guyon) "and from whence?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Pyrochles is his name, renowmed farre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For his bold feates and hardy confidence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full oft approvd in many a cruell warre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The brother of Cymochles, both which arre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sonnes of old Aerates and Despight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Aerates, sonne of Phlegeton and Jarre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Phlegeton is sonne of Herebus and Night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Herebus sonne of Aeternitie is hight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"So from immortall race he does proceede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That mortall hands may not withstand his might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drad for his derring doe and bloody deed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all in blood and spoile is his delight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His am I Atin, his in wrong and right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That matter make for him to worke upon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stirre him up to strife and cruell fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fly therefore, fly this fearefull stead anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Least thy foolhardize worke thy sad confusion."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"His be that care, whom most it doth concerne,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Sayd he) "but whither with such hasty flight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Art thou now bownd? for well mote I discerne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great cause, that carries thee so swifte and light."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"My Lord," (quoth he) "me sent, and streight behight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke Occasion, where so she bee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he is all disposd to bloody fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And breathes out wrath and hainous crueltee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hard is his hap that first fals in his jeopardee."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Mad man," (said then the Palmer) "that does seeke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Occasion to wrath, and cause of strife:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee comes unsought, and shonned followes eke.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Happy! who can abstaine, when Rancor rife</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kindles Revenge, and threats his rusty knife.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Woe never wants where every cause is caught;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rash Occasion makes unquiet life!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Then loe! wher bound she sits, whom thou hast sought,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said Guyon: "let that message to thy Lord be brought."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That when the varlett heard and saw, streight way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He wexed wondrous wroth, and said; "Vile knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That knights and knighthood doest with shame upbray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shewst th'ensample of thy childishe might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With silly weake old woman that did fight!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great glory and gay spoile, sure hast thou gott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stoutly prov'd thy puissance here in sight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shall Pyrochles well requite, I wott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with thy blood abolish so reprochfull blott."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that one of his thrillant darts he threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Headed with yre, and vengeable despight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The quivering steele his aymed end wel knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to his brest it selfe intended right.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he was wary, and, ere it empight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the meant marke, advaunst his shield atweene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which it seizing no way enter might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But backe rebownding left the forckhead keene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eftsoones he fled away, and might no where be scene.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-5" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Pyrrhochles does with Guyon fight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And Furors chayne unbinds,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of whom sore hurt; for his revenge</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Atin Cymochles finds.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Who ever doth to temperaunce apply</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His stedfast life, and all his actions frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Trust me, shal find no greater enimy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then stubborne perturbation to the same.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which right wel the wise doe give that name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For it the goodly peace of staied mindes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Does overthrow, and troublous warre proclame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His owne woes author, who so bound it findes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As did Pyrochles, and it wilfully unbindes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>After that varlets flight, it was not long</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere on the plaine fast pricking Guyon spide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One in bright armes embatteiled full strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, as the Sunny beames do glaunce and glide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the trembling wave, so shined bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And round about him threw forth sparkling fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemd him to enflame on every side:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His steed was bloody red, and fomed yre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When with the maistring spur he did him roughly stire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Approching nigh, he never staid to greete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne chaffar words, prowd corage to provoke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But prickt so fiers, that underneath his feete</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The smouldring dust did rownd about him smoke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both horse and man nigh able for to choke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fayrly couching his steeleheaded speare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him first saluted with a sturdy stroke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It booted nought Sir Guyon, comming neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thincke such hideous puissaunce on foot to beare;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But lightly shunned it; and, passing by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his bright blade did smite at him so fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the sharpe steele, arriving forcibly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On his broad shield, bitt not, but glauncing fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On his horse necke before the quilted sell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from the head the body sundred quight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So him dismounted low he did compell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On foot with him to matchen equall fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The truncked beast fast bleeding did him fowly dight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sore bruzed with the fall he slow uprose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all enraged thus him loudly shent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Disleall Knight, whose coward corage chose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wreake it selfe on beast all innocent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shund the marke at which it should be ment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therby thine armes seem strong, but manhood frayl</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So hast thou oft with guile thine honor blent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But litle may such guile thee now avayl,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If wonted force and fortune doe me not much fayl."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that he drew his flaming sword, and strooke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At him so fiercely, that the upper marge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his sevenfolded shield away it tooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, glauncing on his helmet, made a large</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And open gash therein: were not his targe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That broke the violence of his intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The weary sowle from thence it would discharge;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nathelesse so sore a buff to him it lent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That made him reele, and to his brest his bever bent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Exceeding wroth was Guyon at that blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And much asham'd that stroke of living arme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should him dismay, and make him stoup so low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though otherwise it did him litle harme:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, hurling high his yron braced arme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He smote so manly on his shoulder plate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all his left side it did quite disarme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet there the steel stayd not, but inly bate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deepe in his flesh, and opened wide a red floodgate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Deadly dismayd with horror of that dint</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pyrochles was, and grieved eke entyre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet nathemore did it his fury stint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But added flame unto his former fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That wel nigh molt his hart in raging yre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne thenceforth his approved skill, to ward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or strike, or hurtle rownd in warlike gyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Remembred he, ne car'd for his saufgard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But rudely rag'd, and like a cruell tygre far'd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He hewd, and lasht, and foynd, and thondred blowes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every way did seeke into his life;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne plate, ne male, could ward so mighty throwes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yeilded passage to his cruell knife.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Guyon, in the heat of all his strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was wary wise, and closely did awayt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Avauntage, whilest his foe did rage most rife:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes athwart, sometimes he strook him strayt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And falsed oft his blowes t'illude him with such bayt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like as a Lyon, whose imperiall powrc</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A prowd rebellious Unicorn defyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T'avoide the rash assault and wrathful stowre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his fiers foe, him to a tree applyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when him ronning in full course he spyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He slips aside; the whiles that furious beast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His precious home, sought of his enimyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strikes in the stocke, ne thence can be releast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to the mighty vidtor yields a bounteous feast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With such faire sleight him Guyon often fayld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till at the last all breathlesse, weary, faint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him spying, with fresh onsett he assayld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And kindling new his corage seeming queint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strooke him so hugely, that through great constraint</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He made him stoup perforce unto his knee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doe unwilling worship to the Saint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That on his shield depainted he did see:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such homage till that instant never learned hee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom Guyon seeing stoup, poursewed fast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The present offer of faire victory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soone his dreadfull blade about he cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith he smote his haughty crest so hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That streight on grownd made him full low to lye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then on his brest his vidtor foote he thrust:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that he cryde; "Mercy! doe me not dye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne deeme thy force by fortunes doome unjust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That hath (maugre her spight) thus low me laid in dust."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones his cruel hand Sir Guyon stayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tempring the passion with advizement slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And maistring might on enimy dismayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For th'equall die of warre he well did know:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then to him said; "Live, and alleagaunce owe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To him that gives thee life and liberty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And henceforth by this daies ensample trow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hasty wroth, and heedlesse hazardry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doe breede repentaunce late, and lasting infamy."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So up he let him rise; who, with grim looke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And count'naunce sterne, upstanding, gan to grind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His grated teeth for great disdeigne, and shooke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His sandy lockes, long hanging downe behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Knotted in blood and dust, for grief of mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he in ods of armes was conquered:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet in himselfe some comfort he did find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That him so noble knight had maystered;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose bounty more then might, yet both, he wondered.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which Guyon marking said; "Be nought agriev'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir knight, that thus ye now subdewed arre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was never man, who most conquestes atchiev'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But sometimes had the worse, and lost by warre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet shortly gaynd that losse exceeded farre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Losse is no shame, nor to bee lesse then foe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to bee lesser then himselfe doth marre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both loosers lot, and victours prayse alsoe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vaine others ovcrthrowes who selfe doth overthrow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Fly, O Pyrochles! fly the dreadfull warre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in thy selfe thy lesser partes do move;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Outrageous anger, and woe-working jarre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Direfull impatience, and hart-murdring love:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those, those thy foes, those warriours far remove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which thee to endlesse bale captived lead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But sith in might thou didst my mercy prove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of courtesie to mee the cause aread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thee against me drew with so impetuous dread.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Dreadlesse," (said he) "that shall I soone declare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It was complaind that thou hadst done great tort</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto an aged woman, poore and bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thralled her in chaines with strong effort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Voide of all succour and needfull comfort;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ill beseemes thee, such as I thee see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To worke such shame. Therefore, I thee exhort</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To chaunge thy will, and set Occasion free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to her captive sonne yield his first libertee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereat Sir Guyon smylde; "And is that all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Said he) "that thee so sore displeased hath?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great mercy, sure, for to enlarge a thrall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose freedom shall thee turne to greatest scath!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nath'lesse now quench thy whott emboyling wrath:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Loe! there they bee; to thee I yield them free."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereat he, wondrous glad, out of the path</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did lightly leape, where he them bound did see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gan to breake the bands of their captivitee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as Occasion felt her selfe untyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before her sonne could well assoyled bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She to her use returnd, and streight defyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both Guyon and Pyrochles; th'one (said shee)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bycause he wonne; the other, because hee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was wonne. So matter did she make of nought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To stirre up strife, and garre them disagree:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, soone as Furor was enlargd, she sought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To kindle his quencht fyre, and thousand causes wrought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It was not long ere she inflam'd him so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he would algates with Pyrochles fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his redeemer chalengd for his foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because he had not well mainteind his right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yielded had to that same straunger knight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now gan Pyrochles wex as wood as hee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him affronted with impatient might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So both together fiers engrasped bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whyles Guyon standing by their uncouth strife does see.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Him all that while Occasion did provoke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against Pyrochles, and new matter fram'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the old, him stirring to bee wroke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his late wronges, in which she oft him blam'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For suffering such abuse as knighthood sham'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him dishabled quyte. But he was wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne would with vaine occasions be inflam'd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet others she more urgent did devise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet nothing could him to impatience entise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Their fell contention still increased more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And more thereby increased Furors might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he his foe has hurt and wounded sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him in blood and durt deformed quight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mother eke, more to augment his spight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now brought to him a flaming fyer brond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which she in Stygian lake, ay burning bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had kindled: that she gave into his hond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That armd with fire more hardly he mote him withstond.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho gan that villein wex so fiers and strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nothing might sustaine his furious forse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He cast him downe to ground, and all along</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drew him through durt and myre without remorse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fowly battered his comely corse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Guyon much disdeigned so loathly sight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last he was compeld to cry perforse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Help, O Sir Guyon! helpe, most noble knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To ridd a wretched man from handes of hellish wight!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The knight was greatly moved at his playnt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gan him dight to succour his distresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that the Palmer, by his grave restraynt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him stayd from yielding pitifull redresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said; "Deare sonne, thy causelesse ruth represse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne let thy stout hart melt in pitty vayne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He that his sorrow sought through wilfulnesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his foe fettred would release agayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deserves to taste his follies fruit, repented payne."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Guyon obayd: So him away he drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From needlesse trouble of renewing fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Already fought, his voyage to poursew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But rash Pyrochles varlett, Atin hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When late he saw his Lord in heavie plight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under Sir Guyons puissaunt stroke to fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him deeming dead, as then he seemd in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fledd fast away to tell his funerall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto his brother, whom Cymochles men did call.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He was a man of rare redoubted might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Famous throughout the world for warlike prayse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And glorious spoiles, purchast in perilous fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full many doughtie knightes he in his dayes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had doen to death, subdewde in equall frayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose carkases, for terrour of his name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of fowles and beastes he made the piteous prayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hong their conquerd armes, for more defame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On gallow trees, in honour of his dearest Dame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His dearest Dame is that Enchaunteresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The vyle Acrasia, that with vaine delightes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ydle pleasures in her Bowre of Blisse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Does charme her lovers, and the feeble sprightes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can call out of the bodies of fraile wightes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom then she does transforme to monstrous hewes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And horribly misshapes with ugly sightes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Captiv'd eternally in yron mewes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And darksom dens, where Titan his face never shewes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There Atin fownd Cymochles sojourning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To serve his Lemans love: for he by kynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was given all to lust and loose living,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When ever his fiers handes he free mote fynd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now he has pourd out his ydle mynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In daintie delices, and lavish joyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having his warlike weapons cast behynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And flowes in pleasures and vaine pleasing toyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mingled emongst loose Ladies and lascivious boyes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And over him art, stryving to compayre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With nature, did an Arber greene dispred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Framed of wanton Yvie, flouring fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through which the fragrant Eglantine did spred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His prickling armes, entrayld with roses red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which daintie odours round about them threw:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all within with flowres was garnished,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, when myld Zephyrus emongst them blew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did breath out bounteous smels, and painted colors shew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And fast beside there trickled softly downe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A gentle streame, whose murmuring wave did play</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emongst the puny stones, and made a sowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To lull him soft asleepe that by it lay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wearie Traveiler, wandring that way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therein did often quench his thristy heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then by it his wearie limbes display,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles creeping slomber made him to forget</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His former payne, and wypt away his toilsom sweat.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And on the other syde a pleasaunt grove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was shott up high, full of the stately tree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That dedicated is t' Olympick Jove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to his sonne Alcides, whenas hee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Nemus gayned goodly viftoree:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therein the mery birdes of every sorte</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Chaunted alowd their chearefull harmonee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made emongst them selves a sweete consort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That quickned the dull spright with musicall comfort.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There he him found all carelesly displaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In secrete shadow from the sunny ray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On a sweet bed of lillies softly laid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amidst a flock of Damzelles fresh and gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That rownd about him dissolute did play</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their wanton follies and light meriments:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Every of which did loosely disaray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her upper partes of meet habiliments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shewd them naked, deckt with many ornaments.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And every of them strove with most delights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him to aggrate, and greatest pleasures shew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some framd faire lookes, glancing like evening lights;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Others sweet wordes, dropping like honny dew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some bathed kisses, and did soft embrew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sugred licour through his melting lips:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One boastes her beautie, and does yield to vew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her dainty limbes above her tender hips;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another her out boastes, and all for tryall strips.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He, like an Adder lurking in the weedes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His wandring thought in deepe desire does steepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his frayle eye with spoyle of beauty feedes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes he falsely faines himselfe to sleepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles through their lids his wanton eies do peepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To steale a snatch of amorous conceipt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereby close fire into his heart does creepe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So he them deceives, deceivd in his deceipt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made dronke with drugs of deare voluptuous receipt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Atin, arriving there, when him he spyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus in still waves of deepe delight to wade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fiercely approching to him lowdly cryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Cymochles; oh! no, but Cymochles shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which that manly person late did fade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What is become of great Aerates sonne?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or where hath he hong up his mortall blade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hath so many haughty conquests wonne?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is all his force forlorne, and all his glory donne?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then, pricking him with his sharp-pointed dart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He saide; "Up, up! thou womanish weake knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That here in Ladies lap entombed art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unmindfull of thy praise and prowest might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And weetlesse eke of lately wrought despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles sad Pyrochles lies on sencelesse ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And groneth out his utmost grudging spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through many a stroke and many a streaming wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Calling thy help in vaine that here in joyes art dround."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Suddeinly out of his delightfull dreame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The man awoke, and would have questiond more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he would not endure that wofull theame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For to dilate at large, but urged sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With percing wordes and pittifull implore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him hasty to arise. As one affright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hellish feends, or Furies made uprore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He then uprose, inflamd with fell despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And called for his armes, for he would algates fight:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They bene ybrought; he quickly does him dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lightly mounted passeth on his way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne Ladies loves, ne sweete entreaties, might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Appease liis heat, or hastie passage stay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he has vowd to beene avengd that day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(That day it selfe him seemed all too long)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On him, that did Pyrochles deare dismay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So proudly pricketh on his courser strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Atin ay him pricks with spurs of shame and wrong.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-6" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Guyon is of immodest Merth</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Led into loose Desire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fights with Cymochles, whiles his bro—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Ther burnes in furious fire.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A harder lesson to learne Continence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In joyous pleasure then in grievous paine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For sweetnesse doth allure the weaker sence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So strongly, that uneathes it can refraine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From that which feeble nature covets faine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But griefe and wrath, that be her enemies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And foes of life, she better can abstaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet vertue vauntes in both her victories,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Guyon in them all shewes goodly maysteries.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom bold Cymochles traveiling to finde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With cruell purpose bent to wreake on him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wrath which Atin kindled in his mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came to a river, by whose utmost brim</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wayting to passe, he saw whereas did swim</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Along the shore, as swift as glaunce of eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A litle Gondelay, bedecked trim</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With boughes and arbours woven cunningly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That like a litle forrest seemed outwardly.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And therein sate a Lady fresh and fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Making sweet solace to herselfe alone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes she song as lowd as larke in ayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes she laught, as merry as Pope Jone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was there not with her else any one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to her might move cause of meriment:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Matter of merth enough, though there were none,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She could devise; and thousand waies invent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To feede her foolish humour and vaine jolliment.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when far off Cymochles heard and saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He lowdly cald to such as were abord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The little barke unto the shore to draw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him to ferry over that deepe ford.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The merry mariner unto his word</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone hearkned, and her painted bote streightway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turnd to the shore, where that same warlike Lord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She in received; but Atin by no way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She would admit, albe the knight her much did pray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones her shallow ship away did slide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More swift then swallow sheres the liquid skye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withouten oare or Pilot it to guide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or winged canvas with the wind to fly:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Onely she turnd a pin, and by and by</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It cut away upon the yielding wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne cared she her course for to apply;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For it was taught the way which she would have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And both from rocks and flats it selfe could wisely save.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And all the way the wanton Damsell found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">New merth her passenger to entertaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she in pleasaunt purpose did abound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And greatly joyed merry tales to faine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which a store-house did with her remaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet seemed, nothing well they her became;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all her wordes she drownd with laughter vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wanted grace in utt'ring of the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That turned all her pleasaunce to a scoffing game.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And other whiles vaine toyes she would devize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As her fantasticke wit did most delight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes her head she fondly would aguize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With gaudy girlonds, or fresh flowrets dight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About her necke, or rings of rushes plight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes, to do him laugh, she would assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To laugh at shaking of the leaves light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or to behold the water worke and play</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About her little frigot, therein making way.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her light behaviour and loose dalliaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gave wondrous great contentment to the knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of his way he had no sovenaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor care of vow'd revenge and cruell fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to weake wench did yield his martiall might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So easie was to quench his flamed minde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With one sweete drop of sensuall delight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So easie is t'appease the stormy winde</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of malice in the calme of pleasaunt womankind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Diverse discourses in their way they spent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst which Cymochles of her questioned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both what she was, and what that usage ment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which in her cott she daily praftized?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Vaine man," (saide she) "that wouldest be reckoned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A straunger in thy home, and ignoraunt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Phaedria, (for so my name is red)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Phaedria, thine ownc fellow servaunt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thou to serve Acrasia thy selfc doest vaunt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"In this wide Inland sea, that hight by name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Idle lake, my wandring ship I row,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That knowes her port, and thither sayles by ayme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne care, ne feare I how the wind do blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or whether swift I wend, or whether slow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both slow and swift alike do serve my tourne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne swelling Neptune ne lowd thundring Jove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can chaunge my cheare, or make me ever mourne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My little boat can safely passe this perilous bourne."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whiles thus she talked, and whiles thus she toyd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They were far past the passage which he spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And come unto an Island waste and voyd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That floted in the midst of that great lake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There her small Gondelay her port did make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that gay payre, issewing on the shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disburdned her. Their way they forward take</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the land that lay them faire before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose pleasaunce she him shewd, and plentifull great store.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It was a chosen plott of fertile land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emonest wide waves sett, like a litle nest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if it had by Natures cunning hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bene choycely picked out from all the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And laid forth for ensample of the best:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No daintie flowre or herbe that growes on grownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No arborett with painted blossomes drest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And smelling sweete, but there it might be fownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bud out faire, and throwe her sweete smels al arownd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>No tree whose braunches did not bravely spring;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No braunch whereon a fine bird did not sitt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No bird but did her shrill notes sweetely sing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No song but did containe a lovely ditt.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Trees, braunches, birds, and songs, were framed fitt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For to allure fraile mind to carelesse ease:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Carelesse the man soone woxe, and his weake witt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was overcome of thing that did him please;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So pleased did his wrathfull purpose faire appease.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus when shee had his eyes and sences fed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With false delights, and fild with pleasures vayn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into a shady dale she soft him led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And layd him downe upon a grassy playn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her sweete selfe without dread or disdayn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She sett beside, laying his head disarmd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In her loose lap, it softly to sustayn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where soone he slumbred fearing not be harmd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whiles with a love lay she thus him sweetly charmd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Behold, O man! that toilesome paines doest take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The flowrs, the fields, and all that pleasaunt growes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How they them selves doe thine ensample make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles nothing envious nature them forth throwes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of her fruitfull lap; how no man knowes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They spring, they bud, they blossome fresh and faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And decke the world with their rich pompous showes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet no man for them taketh paines or care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet no man to them can his carefull paines compare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"The lilly, Lady of the flowring field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The flowre-deluce, her lovely Paramoure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bid thee to them thy fruitlesse labors yield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soone leave off this toylsome weary stoure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Loe, loe! how brave she decks her bounteous boure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With silkin curtens and gold coverletts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therein to shrowd her sumptuous Belamoure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet nether spinnes nor cards, ne cares nor fretts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to her mother Nature all her care she letts.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Why then doest thou, O man! that of them all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Art Lord, and eke of nature Soveraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wilfully make thyselfe a wretched thrall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And waste thy joyous howres in needelesse paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeking for daunger and adventures vaine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What bootes it al to have, and nothing use?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who shall him rew that swimming in the maine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will die for thrist, and water doth refuse?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Refuse such fruitlesse toile, and present pleasures chuse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By this she had him lulled fast asleepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of no worldly thing he care did take:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then she with liquors strong his eies did steepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nothing should him hastily awake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So she him lefte, and did her selfe betake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto her boat again, with which she clefte</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The slouthfull wave of that great griesy lake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone shee that Island far behind her lefte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now is come to that same place where first she wefte.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By this time was the worthy Guyon brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the other side of that wide strond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where she was rowing, and for passage sought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him needed not long call; shee soone to hond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her ferry brought, where him she byding fond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his sad guide: him selfe she tooke aboord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the Blacke Palmer suffred still to stond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne would for price or prayers once affbord</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To ferry that old man over the perlous foord.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Guyon was loath to leave his guide behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet being entred might not backe retyre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the flitt barke, obaying to her mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth launched quickly as she did desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne gave him leave to bid that aged sire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adieu; but nimbly ran her wonted course</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through the dull billowes thicke as troubled mire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom nether wind out of their seat could forse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor timely tides did drive out of their sluggish sourse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And by the way, as was her wonted guize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her mery fitt shee freshly gan to reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did of joy and jollity devize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her selfe to cherish, and her guest to cheare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The knight was courteous, and did not forbeare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her honest merth and pleasaunce to partake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when he saw her toy, and gibe, and geare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And passe the bonds of modest merimake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her dalliaunce he despis'd, and follies did forsake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet she still followed her former style,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said and did all that mote him delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till they arrived in that pleasaunt He,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where sleeping late she lefte her other knight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But whenas Guyon of that land had sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He wist him selfe amisse, and angry said;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ah, Dame! perdy ye have not doen me right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus to mislead mee, whiles I you obaid:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me litle needed from my right way to have straid."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Faire Sir," (quoth she) "be not displeasd at all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who fares on sea may not commaund his way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne wind and weather at his pleasure call:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sea is wide, and easy for to stray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wind unstable, and doth never stay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But here a while ye may in safety rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till season serve new passage to assay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Better safe port then be in seas distrest."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therewith she laught, and did her earnest end in jest,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But he, halfe discontent, mote nathelesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himselfe appease, and issewd forth on shore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The joyes whereof and happy fruitfulnesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as he saw she gan him lay before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all, though pleasaunt, yet she made much more:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fields did laugh, the flowres did freshly spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The trees did bud, and early blossomes bore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the quire of birds did sweetly sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And told that gardins pleasures in their caroling.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And she, more sweete then any bird on bough,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would oftentimes emongst them beare a part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strive to passe (as she could well enough)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their native musicke by her skilful art:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So did she all that might his constant hart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withdraw from thought of warlike enterprize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And drowne in dissolute delights apart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where noise of armes, or vew of martiall guize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might not revive desire of knightly exercize.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But he was wise, and wary of her will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever held his hand upon his hart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet would not seeme so rude, and thewed ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As to despise so curteous seeming part</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That gentle Lady did to him impart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, fairly tempring, fond desire subdewd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever her desired to depart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She list not heare, but her disports poursewd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ever bad him stay till time the tide renewd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now by this Cymochles howre was spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he awoke out of his ydle dreme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, shaking off his drowsy dreriment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan him avize, howe ill did him beseme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In slouthfull sleepe his molten hart to steme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And quench the brond of his conceived yre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho up he started, stird with shame extreme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne staied for his Damsell to inquire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But marched to the Strond there passage to require.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And in the way he with Sir Guyon mett,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Accompanyde with Phaedria the faire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones he gan to rage, and inly frett,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Crying; "Let be that Lady debonaire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou recreaunt knight, and soone thyselfe prepaire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To batteile, if thou meane her love to gayn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Loe, loe! already how the fowles in aire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe flocke, awaiting shortly to obtayn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy carcas for their pray, the guerdon of thy payn."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And therewithall he fiersly at him flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with importune outrage him assayld;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, soone prepard to field, his sword forth drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him with equall valew countervayld:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their mightie strokes their haberjeons dismayld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And naked made each others manly spalles;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The mortall steele despiteously entayld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deepe in their flesh, quite through the yron walles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That a large purple streame adowne their giambeux falles.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Cymochles, that had never mett before</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So puissant foe, with envious despight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His prowd presumed force increased more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disdeigning to bee held so long in fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir Guyon, grudging not so much his might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As those unknightly raylinges which he spoke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With wrathfull fire his corage kindled bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereof devising shortly to be wroke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And doubling all his powres redoubled every stroke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Both of them high attonce their handes enhaunst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both attonce their huge blowes down did sway.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cymochles sword on Guyons shield yglaunst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thereof nigh one quarter sheard away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Guyons angry blade so fiers did play</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On th'others helmett, which as Titan shone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That quite it clove his plumed crest in tway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bared all his head unto the bone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherewith astonisht, still he stood as sencelesse stone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Still as he stood, fayre Phaedria, that beheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That deadly daunger, soone atweene them ran;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at their feet her selfe most humbly feld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Crying with pitteous voyce, and count'nance wan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ah, well away! most noble Lords, how can</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your cruell eyes endure so pitteous sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To shed your lives on ground? Wo worth the man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That first did teach the cursed steele to bight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his owne flesh, and make way to the living spright!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"If ever love of Lady did empierce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your yron brestes, or pittie could find place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withhold your bloody handes from battaill fierce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, sith for me ye fight, to me this grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both yield, to stay your deadly stryfe a space."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They stayd a while, and forth she gan proceede:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Most wretched woman and of wicked race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That am the authour of this hainous deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cause of death betweene two doughtie knights do breed!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But, if for me ye fight, or me will serve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not this rude kynd of battaill, nor these armes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are meet, the which doe men in bale to sterve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doolefull sorrow heape with deadly harmes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such cruell game my scarmoges disarmes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another warre, and other weapons, I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe love, where love does give his sweet Alarmes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without bloodshed, and where the enimy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Does yield unto his foe a pleasaunt victory.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Debatefull strife, and cruell enmity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The famous name of knighthood fowly shend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But lovely peace, and gentle amity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in Amours the passing howres to spend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The mightie martial! handes doe most commend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of love they ever greater glory bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then of their armes; Mars is Cupidoes frend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And is for Venus loves renowmed more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then all his wars and spoiles, the which he did of yore."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith she sweetly smyld. They, though full bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To prove extremities of bloody fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet at her speach their rages gan relent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And calme the sea of their tempestuous spight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such powre have pleasing wordes: such is the might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of courteous clemency in gentle hart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now after all was ceast, the Faery knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besought that Da'mzell suffer him depart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yield him ready passage to that other part.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She no lesse glad then he desirous was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his departure thence; for of her joy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And vaine delight she saw he light did pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A foe of folly and immodest toy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still solemne sad, or still disdainfull coy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Delighting all in armes and cruell warre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her sweet peace and pleasures did annoy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Troubled with terrour and unquiet jarre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she well pleased was thence to amove him farre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho him she brought abord, and her swift bote</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forthwith directed to that further strand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which on the dull waves did lightly flote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soone arrived on the shallow sand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where gladsome Guyon salied forth to land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to that Damsell thankes gave for reward.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon that shore he spyed Atin stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There by his maister left, when late he far'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Phaedrias flitt barck over that perlous shard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Well could he him remember, sith of late</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He with Pyrochles sharp debatement made:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Streight gan he him revyle, and bitter rate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Shepheardes curre, that in darke eveninges shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath tracled forth some salvage beastes trade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Vile Miscreaunt," (said he) "whither dost thou flye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The shame and death, which will thee soone invade?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What coward hand shall doe thee next to dye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That art thus fowly fledd from famous enimy?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that he stifly shooke his steelhead dart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But sober Guyon, hearing him so rayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though somewhat moved in his mightie hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet with strong reason maistred passion fraile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And passed fayrely forth. He, turning taile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Back to the strond retyrd, and there still stayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Awaiting passage which him late did faile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles Cymochles with that wanton mayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hasty heat of his avowd revenge delayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whylest there the varlet stood, he saw from farre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An armed knight that towardes him fast ran;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He ran on foot, as if in lucklesse warre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His forlorne steed from him the vidtour wan:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He seemed breathlesse, hartlesse, faint, and wan;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all his armour sprinckled was with blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soyld with durtie gore, that no man can</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Discerne the hew thereof. He never stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But bent his hastie course towardes the ydle flood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The varlett saw, when to the flood he came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How without stop or stay he fiersly lept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And deepe him selfe beducked in the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in the lake his loftie crest was stept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne of his safetie seemed care he kept;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with his raging armes he rudely flasht</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The waves about, and all his armour swept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the blood and filth away was washt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet still he bet the water, and the billowes dasht.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Atin drew nigh to weet what it mote bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For much he wondred at that uncouth sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom should he but his owne deare Lord there see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His owne deare Lord Pyrochles in sad plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ready to drowne him selfe for fell despight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Harrow now out, and well away!" he cryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"What dismall day hath lent this cursed light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see my Lord so deadly damnify de?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pyrochles, O Pyrochles! what is thee betyde?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"I burne, I burne, I burne!" then lowd he cryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"O! how I burne with implacable fyre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet nought can quench mine inly flaming syde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor sea of licour cold, nor lake of myre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nothing but death can doe me to respyre."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ah! be it," (said he) "from Pyrochles farre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After pursewing death once to requyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or think, that ought those puissant hands may marre</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death is for wretches borne under unhappy starre."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Perdye, then is it fitt for me," (said he)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"That am, I weene, most wretched man alive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Burning in flames, yet no flames can I see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dying dayly, dayly yet revive.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O Atin! helpe to me last death to give."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The varlet at his plaint was grieved so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That his deepe wounded hart in two did rive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, his owne health remembring now no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did follow that ensample which he blam'd afore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Into the lake he lept his Lord to ayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(So Love the dread of daunger doth despise)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of him catching hold him strongly stayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From drowning. But more happy he then wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that seas nature did him not avise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The waves thereof so slow and sluggish were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Engrost with mud which did them fowle agrise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That every weighty thing they did upbeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne ought mote ever sinck downe to the bottom there.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whiles thus they strugled in that ydle wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strove in vaine, the one him selfe to drowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other both from drowning for to save,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lo! to that shore one in an auncient gowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose hoary locks great gravitie did crowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Holding in hand a goodly arming sword,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By fortune came, ledd with the troublous sowne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where drenched deepe he fownd in that dull ford</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The carefull servaunt stryving with his raging Lord.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Him Atin spying knew right well of yore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lowdly cald; "Help, helpe! O Archimage!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To save my Lord in wretched plight forlore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Helpe with thy hand, or with thy counsell sage:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weake handes, but counsell is most strong in age."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him when the old man saw, he wondred sore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see Pyrochles there so rudely rage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet sithens helpe, he saw, he needed more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then pitty, he in hast approched to the shore,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And cald; "Pyrochles! what is this I see?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What hellish fury hath at earst thee hent?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Furious ever I thee knew to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet never in this straunge astonishment."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"These flames, these flames" (he cryde) "doe me torment."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"What flames," (quoth he) "when I thee present see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In daunger rather to be drent then brent?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Harrow! the flames which me consume," (said hee)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne can be quencht, within my secret bowelles bee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"That cursed man, that cruel feend of hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Furor, oh! Furor hath me thus bedight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His deadly woundes within my liver swell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his whott fyre burnes in mine entralles bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kindled through his infernall brond of spight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith late with him I batteill vaine would boste;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That now, I weene, Joves dreaded thunder light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Does scorch not halfe so sore, nor damned ghoste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In flaming Phlegeton does not so felly roste."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when as Archimago heard, his griefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He knew right well, and him attonce disarm'd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then searcht his secret woundes, and made a priefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of every place that was with bruzing harmd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or with the hidden fire too inly warmd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which doen, he balmes and herbes thereto applyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evermore with mightie spels them charmd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in short space he has them qualifyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And him restor'd to helth that would have algates dyde.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-7" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Guyon findes Mamon in a delve,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Sunning his threasure hore:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is by him tempted, and led down,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To see his secrete store.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>As pilot well expert in perilous wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to a stedfast starre his course hath bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When foggy mistes or cloudy tempests have</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The faithfull light of that faire lampe yblent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cover'd heaven with hideous dreriment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his card and compas firmes his eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The maysters of his long experiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to them does the steddy helme apply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bidding his winged vessell fairely forward fly:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So Guyon having lost his trustie guyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Late left beyond that Ydle lake, proceedes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet on his way, of none accompanyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evermore himselfe with comfort feedes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his own vertues and praise-worthie deedes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So, long he yode, yet no adventure found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which fame of her shrill trompet worthy reedes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For still he traveild through wide wastfull ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That nought but desert wildernesse shewed all around.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last he came unto a gloomy glade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cover'd with boughes and shrubs from heavens light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereas he sitting found in secret shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An uncouth, salvage, and uncivile wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of griesly hew and fowle ill favoured sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His face with smoke was tand, and eies were bleard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His head and beard with sout were ill bedight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His cole-blacke hands did seeme to have ben seard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In smythes fire-spitting forge, and nayles like clawes appeard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His yron cote, all overgrowne with rust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was underneath enveloped with gold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose glistring glosse, darkned with filthy dust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well yet appeared to have beene of old</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A worke of rich entayle and curious mould,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Woven with antickes and wyld ymagery;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his lap a masse of coyne he told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And turned upside downe, to feede his eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And covetous desire with his huge threasury.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And round about him lay on every side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great heapes of gold that never could be spent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which some were rude owre, not purifide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Mulcibers devouring element;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some others were new driven, and distent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into great Ingowes and to wedges square;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some in round plates withouten moniment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But most were stampt, and in their metal bare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The antique shapes of kings and kesars straunge and rare,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as he Guyon saw, in great affright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And haste he rose for to remove aside</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those pretious hils from straungers envious sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And downe them poured through an hole full wide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the hollow earth, them there to hide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Guyon, lightly to him leaping, stayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His hand that trembled as one terrifyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And though himselfe were at the sight dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet him perforce restraynd, and to him doubtfull sayd:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"What art thou, man, (if man at all thou art)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That here in desert hast thine habitaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And these rich hils of welth doest hide apart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the worldes eye, and from her right usaunce?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereat, with staring eyes fixed askaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In great disdaine he answerd: "Hardy Elfe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That darest view my direfull countenaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I read thee rash and heedlesse of thy selfe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To trouble my still seate, and heapes of pretious pelfe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"God of the world and worldlings I me call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great Mammon, greatest god below the skye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of my plenty poure out unto all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto none my graces do envye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Riches, renowme, and principality,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Honour, estate, and all this worldes good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which men swinck and sweat incessantly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fro me do flow into an ample flood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the hollow earth have their eternall brood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Wherefore, if me thou deigne to serve and sew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At thy commaund lo! all these mountaines bee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or if to thy great mind, or greedy vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All these may not suffise, there shall to thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ten times so much be nombred francke and free."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Mammon," (said he) "thy godheads vaunt is vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And idle offers of thy golden fee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To them that covet such eye-glutting gaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Proffer thy giftes, and fitter servaunts entertaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Me ill besits, that in der-doing armes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And honours suit my vowed daies do spend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto thy bounteous baytes and pleasing charmes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which weake men thou witchest, to attend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Regard of worldly mucke doth fowly blend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And low abase the high heroicke spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That joyes for crownes and kingdomes to contend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire shields, gay steedes, bright armes be my delight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those be the riches fit for an advent'rous knight."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Vaine glorious Elfe," (saide he) "doest not thou weet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That money can thy wantes at will supply?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sheilds, steeds, and armes, and all things for thee meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It can purvay in twinckling of an eye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And crownes and kingdomes to thee multiply.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do not I kings create, and throw the crowne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes to him that low in dust doth ly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him that raignd into his rowme thrust downe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And whom I lust do heape with glory and renowne?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"All otherwise" (saide he) "I riches read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And deeme them roote of all disquietnesse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First got with guile, and then preserved with dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after spent with pride and lavishnesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Leaving behind them griefe and heavinesse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Infinite mischiefes of them doe arize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strife and debate, bloodshed and bitternesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Outrageous wrong, and hellish covetize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That noble heart as great dishonour doth despize.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ne thine be kingdomes, ne the scepters thine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But realmes and rulers thou doest both confound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And loyall truth to treason doest incline:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Witnesse the guiltlesse blood pourd oft on ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The crowned often slaine, the slayer cround;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sacred Diademe in peeces rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And purple robe gored with many a wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Castles surprizd, great cities sackt and brent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So mak'st thou kings, and gaynest wrongfull government.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Long were to tell the troublous stormes that tosse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The private state, and make the life unsweet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who swelling sayles in Caspian sea doth crosse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in frayle wood on Adrian gulf doth fleet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth not, I weene, so many evils meet."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Mammon wexing wroth; "And why then," sayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Are mortall men so fond and undiscreet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So evill thing to seeke unto their ayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And having not complaine, and having it upbrayd?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Indeede," (quoth he) "through fowle intemperaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Frayle men are oft captiv'd to covetise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But would they thinke with how small allowaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untroubled Nature doth her selfe suffise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such superfluities they would despise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with sad cares empeach our native joyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At the well-head the purest streames arise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But mucky filth his braunching armes annoyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with uncomely weedes the gentle wave accloyes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"The antique world, in his first flowring youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fownd no defect in his Creators grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with glad thankes, and unreproved truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The guifts of soveraine bounty did embrace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like Angels life was then mens happy cace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But later ages pride, like corn-fed steed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abusd her plenty and fat swolne encreace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To all licentious lust, and gan exceed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The measure of her meane and naturall first need.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Then gan a cursed hand the quiet wombe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his great Grandmother with steele to wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the hid treasures in her sacred tombe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Sacriledge to dig. Therein he fownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fountaines of gold and silver to abownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which the matter of his huge desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pompous pride eftsoones he did compownd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then avarice gan through his veines inspire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His greedy flames, and kindled life-devouring fire."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Sonne," (said he then) "lett be thy bitter scorne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And leave the rudenesse of that antique age</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To them that liv'd therm in state forlorne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou, that doest live in later times, must wage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy workes for wealth, and life for gold engage.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If then thee list my offred grace to use,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Take what thou please of all this surplusage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If thee list not, leave have thou to refuse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thing refused doe not afterward accuse."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Me list not" (said the Elfin knight) "receave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thing offred, till I know it well be gott;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne wote I but thou didst these goods bereave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From rightfull owner by unrighteous lott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that bloodguiltinesse or guile them blott."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Perdy," (quoth he) "yet never eie did vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne tong did tell, ne hand these handled not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But safe I have them kept in secret mew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From hevens sight, and powre of al which them poursew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"What secret place" (quoth he) "can safely hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So huge a masse, and hide from heavens eie?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or where hast thou thy wonne, that so much gold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou canst preserve from wrong and robbery?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Come thou," (quoth he) "and see." So by and by</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through that thick covert he him led, and fownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A darkesome way, which no man could descry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That deep descended through the hollow grownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And was with dread and horror compassed arownd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At length they came into a larger space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That stretcht itselfe into an ample playne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through which a beaten broad high way did trace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That streight did lead to Plutoes griesly rayne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By that wayes side there sate internall Payne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fast beside him sat tumultuous Strife:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The one in hand an yron whip did strayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other brandished a bloody knife;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And both did gnash their teeth, and both did threten life.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>On thother side in one consort there sate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cruell Revenge, and rancorous Despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disloyall Treason, and hart-burning Hate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But gnawing Gealosy, out of their sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sitting alone, his bitter lips did bight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And trembling Feare still to and fro did fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And found no place wrier safe he shroud him might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lamenting Sorrow did in darknes lye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shame his ugly face did hide from living eye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And over them sad horror with grim hew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did alwaies sore, beating his yron wings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after him Owles and Night-ravens flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hatefull messengers of heavy things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of death and dolor telling sad tidings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles sad Celeno, sitting on a clifte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A song of bale and bitter sorrow sings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hart of flint asonder could have rifte;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which having ended after him she flyeth swifte.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All these before the gates of Pluto lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By whom they passing spake unto them nought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But th' Elfin knight with wonder all the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did feed his eyes, and fild his inner thought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last him to a litle dore he brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to the gate of Hell, which gaped wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was next adjoyning, ne them parted ought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Betwixt them both was but a litle stride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That did the house of Richesse from hell-mouth divide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Before the dore sat selfe-consuming Care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Day and night keeping wary watch and ward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For feare least Force or Fraud should unaware</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Breake in, and spoile the treasure there in gard:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne would he suffer Sleepe once thither-ward</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Approch, albe his drowsy den were next;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For next to death is Sleepe to be compard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore his house is unto his annext:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here Sleep, ther Richesse, and Hel-gate them both betwext.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So soon as Mammon there arrivd, the dore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To him did open and affoorded way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him followed eke Sir Guyon evermore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne darkenesse him, ne daunger might dismay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone as he entred was, the dore streight way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did shutt, and from behind it forth there lept</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An ugly feend, more fowle then dismall day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which with monstrous stalke behind him stept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ever as he went dew watch upon him kept.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Well hoped hee, ere long that hardy guest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If ever covetous hand, or lustfull eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or lips he layd on thing that likte him best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ever sleepe his eie-strings did untye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should be his pray. And therefore still on hye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He over him did hold his cruell clawes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Threatning with greedy gripe to doe him dye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rend in peeces with his ravenous pawes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If ever he transgrest the fatall Stygian lawes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That houses forme within was rude and strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lyke an huge cave hewne out of rocky clifte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whose rough vaut the ragged breaches hong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Embost with massy gold of glorious guifte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with rich metall loaded every rifte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That heavy ruine they did seeme to threatt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And over them Arachne high did lifte</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her cunning web, and spred her subtile nett,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enwrapped in fowle smoke and clouds more black then Jett.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Both roofe, and floore, and walls, were all of gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But overgrowne with dust and old decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hid in darkenes, that none could behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hew thereof; for vew of cherefull day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did never in that house it selfe display,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But a faint shadow of uncertein light:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as a lamp, whose life does fade away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or as the Moone, cloathed with clowdy night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Does show to him that walkes in feare and sad affright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In all that rowme was nothing to be scene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But huge great yron chests, and coffers strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All bard with double bends, that none could weene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them to efforce by violence or wrong:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On every side they placed were along;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all the grownd with sculs was scattered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dead mens bones, which round about were flong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose lives, it seemed, whilome there were shed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And their vile carcases now left unburied.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They forward passe; ne Guyon yet spoke word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that they came unto an yron dore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to them opened of his owne accord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shewd of richesse such exceeding store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As eie of man did never see before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever could within one place be fownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though all the wealth which is, or was of yore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could gathered be through all the world arownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that above were added to that under grownd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The charge thereof unto a covetous Spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Commaunded was, who thereby did attend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And warily awaited day and night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From other covetous feends it to defend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who it to rob and ransacke did intend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Mammon, turning to that warriour, said;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Loe! here the worldes blis: loe! here the end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which al men doe ayme, rich to be made:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such grace now to be happy is before thee laid."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Certes," (sayd he) "I n'ill thine offred grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne to be made so happy doe intend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another blis before mine eyes I place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another happines, another end.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To them that list these base regardes I lend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But I in armes, and in atchievements brave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do rather choose my flitting houres to spend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to be Lord of those that riches have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then them to have my selfe, and be their servile sclave."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereat the feend his gnashing teeth did grate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And griev'd so long to lacke his greedie pray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For well he weened that so glorious bayte</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would tempt his guest to take thereof assay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had he so doen, he had him snatcht away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More light then Culver in the Faulcons fist.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eternall God thee save from such decay!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, whenas Mammon saw his purpose mist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him to entrap unwares another way he wist.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thence forward he him ledd, and shortly brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto another rowme, whose dore forthright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To him did open, as it had beene taught.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therein an hundred raunges weren pight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hundred fournaces all burning bright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By every fournace many feendes did byde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deformed creatures, horrible in sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every feend his busie paines applyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To melt the golden metall, ready to be tryde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One with great bellowes gathered filling ayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with forst wind the fewell did inflame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another did the dying bronds repayre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With yron tongs, and sprinckled ofte the same</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With liquid waves, fiers Vulcans rage to tame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, maystring them, renewd his former heat:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some scumd the drosse that from the metall came;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some stird the molten owre with ladles great;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every one did swincke, and every one did sweat.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, when an earthly wight they present saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Glistring in armes and battailous aray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From their whot work they did themselves withdraw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wonder at the sight; for till that day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They never creature saw that cam that way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their staring eyes sparckling with fervent fyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ugly shapes did nigh the man dismay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, were it not for shame, he would retyre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till that him thus bespake their soveraine Lord and syre;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Behold, thou Faeries sonne, with mortall eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That living eye before did never see.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The thing, that thou didst crave so earnestly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet whence all the wealth late shewd by mee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proceeded, lo! now is reveald to thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here is the fountaine of the worldes good:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now, therefore, if thou wilt enriched bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Avise thee well, and chaunge thy wilfull mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Least thou perhaps hereafter wish, and be withstood."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Suffise it then, thou Money God," (quoth hee)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"That all thine ydle offers I refuse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All that I need I have: what needeth mee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To covet more then I have cause to use?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With such vaine shewes thy worldlinges vyle abuse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But give me leave to follow mine emprise."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mammon was much displeasd, yet no'te he chuse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But beare the rigour of his bold mesprise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thence him forward ledd him further to entise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He brought him, through a darksom narrow strayt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To a broad gate all built of beaten gold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gate was open; but therein did wayt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A sturdie villein, stryding stiffe and bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if the highest God defy he would:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his right hand an yron club he held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he himselfe was all of golden mould,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet had both life and sence, and well could weld</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That cursed weapon, when his cruell foes he queld.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Disdayne he called was, and did disdayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be so cald, and who so did him call:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sterne was his looke, and full of stomacke vayne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His portaunce terrible, and stature tall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far passing th' hight of men terrestriall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like an huge Gyant of the Titans race;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That made him scorne all creatures great and small,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his pride all others powre deface:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More fitt emongst black fiendes then men to have his place.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as those glitterand armes he did espye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with their brightnesse made that darknes light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His harmefull club he gan to hurtle hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And threaten batteill to the Faery knight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who likewise gan himselfe to batteill dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till Mammon did his hasty hand withhold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And counseld him abstaine from perilous fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For nothing might abash the villein bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne mortall steele emperce his miscreated mould.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So having him with reason pacifyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that fiers Carle commaunding to forbeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He brought him in. The rowme was large and wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As it some Gyeld or solemne Temple weare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Many great golden pillours did upbeare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The massy roofe, and riches huge sustayne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every pillour decked was full deare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With crownes, and Diademes, and titles vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which mortall Princes wore whiles they on earth did rayne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A route of people there assembled were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of every sort and nation under skye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with great uprore preaced to draw nere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To th'upper part, where was advaunced hye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A stately siege of soveraine majestye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thereon satt a woman, gorgeous gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And richly cladd in robes of royaltye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That never earthly Prince in such aray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His glory did enhaunce, and pompous pryde display.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her face right wondrous faire did seeme to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her broad beauties beam great brightnes threw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through the dim shade, that all men might it see:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was not that same her owne native hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wrought by art and counterfetted shew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereby more lovers unto her to call:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nath'lesse most hevenly faire in deed and vew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She by creation was, till she did fall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thenceforth she sought for helps to cloke her crime withall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There, as in glistring glory she did sitt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She held a great gold chaine ylincked well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose upper end to highest heven was knitt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lower part did reach to lowest Hell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all that preace did rownd about her swell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To catchen hold of that long chaine, thereby</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To climbe aloft, and others to excell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was Ambition, rash desire to sty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every linck thereof a step of dignity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Some thought to raise themselves to high degree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By riches and unrighteous reward;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some by close shouldring; some by flatteree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Others through friendes; others for base regard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all by wrong waies for themselves prepard:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those that were up themselves kept others low;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those that were low themselves held others hard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne suffred them to ryse or greater grow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But every one did strive his fellow downe to throw.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which whenas Guyon saw, he gan inquire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What meant that preace about that Ladies throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And what she was that did so high aspyre?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him Mammon answered; "That goodly one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom all that folke with such contention</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe flock about, my deare, my daughter is:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Honour and dignitie from her alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Derived are, and all this worldes blis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which ye men doe strive; few gett, but many mis:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And fayre Philotime she rightly hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fairest wight that wonneth under skie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that this darksom neather world her light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth dim with horror and deformity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Worthie of heven and hye felicitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whence the gods have her for envy thrust:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, sith thou hast found favour in mine eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy spouse I will her make, if that thou lust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she may thee advance for works and merits just."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Gramercy, Mammon," (said the gentle knight)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"For so great grace and offred high estate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But I, that am fraile flesh and earthly wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unworthy match for such immortall mate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My selfe well wote, and mine unequall fate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And were I not, yet is my trouth yplight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And love avowd to other Lady late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to remove the same I have no might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To chaunge love causelesse is reproch to warlike knight."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Mammon emmoved was with inward wrath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, forcing it to fayne, him forth thence ledd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through griesly shadowes by a beaten path,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into a gardin goodly garnished</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hearbs and fruits, whose kinds mote not be redd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not such as earth out of her fruitful! woomb</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throwes forth to men, sweet and well savored,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But direfull deadly black, both leafe and bloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fitt to adorne the dead, and deck the drery toombe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There mournfull Cypresse grew in greatest store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And trees of bitter Gall, and Heben sad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dead sleeping Poppy, and black Hellebore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cold Coloquintida, and Tetra mad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mortall Samnitis, and Cicuta bad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which th'unjust Atheniens made to dy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wise Socrates; who, thereof quaffing glad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pourd out his life and last Philosophy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the fayre Critias, his dearest Belamy!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Gardin of Proserpina this hight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the midst thereof a silver seat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a thick Arber goodly over-dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which she often usd from open heat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her selfe to shroud, and pleasures to entreat:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Next thereunto did grow a goodly tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With braunches broad dispredd and body great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Clothed with leaves, that none the wood mote see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And loaden all with fruit as thick as it might bee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Their fruit were golden apples glistring bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That goodly was their glory to behold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On earth like never grew, ne living wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like ever saw, but they from hence were sold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For those which Hercules, with conquest bold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Got from great Atlas daughters, hence began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And planted there did bring forth fruit of gold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And those with which th' Euboean young man wan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swift Atalanta, when through craft he her out ran.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Here also sprong that goodly golden fruit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which Acontius got his lover trew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom he had long time sought with fruitlesse suit:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here eke that famous golden Apple grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which emongst the gods false Ate threw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which th' Idaean Ladies disagreed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till partiall Paris dempt it Venus dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And had of her fayre Helen for his meed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That many noble Greekes and Trojans made to bleed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The warlike Elfe much wondred at this tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So fayre and great that shadowed all the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his broad braunches, laden with rich fee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did stretch themselves without the utmost bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of this great gardin, compast with a mound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which over-hanging, they themselves did steepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In a blacke flood, which flow'd about it round.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is the river of Cocytus deepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which full many soules do endlesse wayle and weepe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which to behold he clomb up to the bancke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And looking downe saw many damned wightes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In those sad waves, which direfull deadly stancke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Plonged continually of cruell Sprightes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with their piteous cryes, and yelling shrightes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They made the further shore resounden wide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emongst the rest of those same ruefull sightes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One cursed creature he by chaunce espide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That drenched lay full deepe under the Garden side.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Deepe was he drenched to the upmost chin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet gaped still as coveting to drinke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the cold liquor which he waded in;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stretching forth his hand did often thinke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To reach the fruit which grew upon the brincke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But both the fruit from hand, and flood from mouth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did fly abacke, and made him vainely swincke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles he sterv'd with hunger, and with drouth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He daily dyde, yet never throughly dyen couth.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The knight, him seeing labour so in vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ask't who he was, and what he ment thereby?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, groning deepe, thus answerd him againe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Most cursed of all creatures under skye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lo! Tantalus, I here tormented lye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whom high Jove wont whylome feasted bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lo! here I now for want of food doe dye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, if that thou be such as I thee see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of grace I pray thee, give to eat and drinke to mee!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Nay, nay, thou greedy Tantalus," (quoth he)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Abide the fortune of thy present fate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto all that live in high degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ensample be of mind intemperate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To teach them how to use their present state."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan the cursed wretch alowd to cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Accusing highest Jove and gods ingrate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke blaspheming heaven bitterly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As author of unjustice, there to let him dye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He lookt a litle further, and espyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another wretch, whose carcas deepe was drent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within the river, which the same did hyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But both his handes, most filthy feculent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above the water were on high extent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And faynd to wash themselves incessantly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet nothing cleaner were for such intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But rather fowler seemed to the eye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So lost his labour vaine and ydle industry.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The knight him calling asked who he was?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, lifting up his head, him answerd thus;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"I Pilate am, the falsest Judge, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And most unjust; that, by unrighteous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wicked doome, to Jewes despiteous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Delivered up the Lord of life to dye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did acquite a murdrer felonous;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles my handes I washt in purity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whiles my soule was soyld with fowle iniquity.'</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Infinite moe tormented in like paine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He there beheld, too long here to be told:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne Mammon would there let him long remayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For terrour of the tortures manifold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which the damned soules he did behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But roughly him bespake: "Thou fearefull foole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why takest not of that same fruite of gold?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne sittest downe on that same silver stoole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To rest thy weary person in the shadow coole?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All which he did to do him deadly fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In frayle intemperaunce through sinfull bayt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which if he inclyned had at all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That dreadfull feend, which did behinde him wayt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would him have rent in thousand peeces strayt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he was wary wise in all his way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And well perceived his deceiptfull sleight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne suffred lust his safety to betray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So goodly did beguile the Guyler of his pray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now he has so long remained theare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That vitall powres gan wexe both weake and wan</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For want of food and sleepe, which two upbeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like mightie pillours, this frayle life of man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none without the same enduren can:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For now three dayes of men were full outwrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since he this hardy enterprize began:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forthy great Mammon fayrely he besought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the world to guyde him backe, as he him brought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The God, though loth, yet was constraynd t'obay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For lenger time then that no living wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Below the earth might suffred be to stay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So backe againe him brought to living light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all so soone as his enfeebled spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan sucke this vitall ayre into his brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As overcome with too exceeding might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The life did flit away out of her nest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all his sences were with deadly fit opprest.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-8" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Sir Guyon, laid in swowne, is by</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Acrates sonnes despoyld,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whom Arthur soone hath reskewed</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And Paynim brethren foyld.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And is there care in heaven? And is there love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In heavenly spirits to these creatures bace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That may compassion of their evilles move?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There is: else much more wretched were the cace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of men then beasts. But O! th'exceeding grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of highest God that loves his creatures so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all his workes with mercy doth embrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That blessed Angels he sends to and fro,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To serve to wicked man, to serve his wicked foe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>How oft do they their silver bowers leave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To come to succour us that succour want!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How oft do they with golden pineons cleave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The flitting skyes, like flying Pursuivant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against fowle feendes to ayd us militant!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They for us fight, they watch and dewly ward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And their bright Squadrons round about us plant;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all for love, and nothing for reward.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O! why should hevenly God to men have such regard</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Dunne: the while that Guyon did abide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mamons house, the Palmer, whom whyleare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That wanton Mayd of passage had denide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By f ur ther search had passage found elsewhere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, being on his way, approched neare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where Guyon lay in traunce; when suddeinly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He heard a voyce that called lowd and cleare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Come hither! hither! O, come hastily!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all the fields resounded with the ruefull cry.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Palmer lent his earc unto the noyce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet who called so importunely:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Againe he heard a more efforced voyce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That bad him come in haste. He by and by</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His feeble feet directed to the cry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to that shady delve him brought at last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where Mammon earst did sunne his threasury;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There the good Guyon he found slumbring fast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In senceles dreame; which sight at first him sore aghast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Beside his head there satt a faire young man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of wondrous beauty and of freshest yeares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose tender bud to blossome new began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And florish faire above his equall peares:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His snowy front, curled with golden heares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like Phoebus face adornd with sunny rayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Divinely shone; and two sharpe winged sheares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Decked with diverse plumes, like painted Jayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were fixed at his backe to cut his ayery wayes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like as Cupido on Idasan hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When having laid his cruell bow away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mortall arrowes, wherewith he doth fill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The world with murdrous spoiles and bloody pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his faire mother he him dights to play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his goodly sisters, Graces three:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Goddesse, pleased with his wanton play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Suffers her selfe through sleepe beguild to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whiles the other Ladies mind theyr mery glee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when the Palmer saw, abasht he was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through fear and wonder that he nought could say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till him the childe bespoke; "Long lackt, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath bene thy faithfull aide in hard assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles deadly fitt thy pupill doth dismay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behold this heavy sight, thou reverend Sire!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But dread of death and dolor doe away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For life ere long shall to her home retire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he that breathlesse seems shal corage both respire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"The charge, which God doth unto me arrett,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his deare safety, I to thee commend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet will I not forgoe, ne yet forgett</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The care thereof my selfe unto the end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But evermore him succour, and defend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against his foe and mine: watch thou, I pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For evill is at hand him to offend."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So having said, eftsoones he gan display</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His painted nimble wings, and vanisht quite away,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Palmer seeing his lefte empty place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his slow eies beguiled of their sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Woxe sore affraid, and standing still a space</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gaz'd after him, as fowle escapt by flight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last, him turning to his charge behight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With trembling hand his troubled pulse gan try;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where finding life not yet dislodged quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He much rejoyst, and courd it tenderly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As chicken newly hatcht, from dreaded destiny.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last he spide where towards him did pace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two Paynim knights al armd as bright as skie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And them beside an aged Sire did trace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And far before a light-foote Page did flie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That breathed strife and troublous enmitie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those were the two sonnes of Aerates old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, meeting earst with Archimago slie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Foreby that idle strond, of him were told</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he which earst them combatted was Guyon bold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which to avenge on him they dearly vowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where ever that on ground they mote him find:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">False Archimage provokte their corage prowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stryful Atin in their stubborne mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Coles of contention and whot vengeaunce tind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now bene they come whereas the Palmer sate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Keeping that slombred corse to him assind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well knew they bbth his person, sith of late</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With him in bloody armes they rashly did debate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when Pyrochles saw, inflam'd with rage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sire he fowl bespake: "Thou dotard vile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with thy brutenesse shendst thy comely age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abandon soone, I read, the caytive spoile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that same outcast carcas, that erewhile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made it selfe famous through false trechery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And crownd his coward crest with knightly stile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Loe! where he now inglorious doth lye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To proove he lived il that did thus fowly dye."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom the Palmer fearlesse answered:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Certes, Sir knight, ye bene too much to blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus for to blott the honor of the dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with fowle cowardize his carcas shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose living handes immortalizd his name.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vile is the vengeaunce on the ashes cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And envy base to barke at sleeping fame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was never wight that treason of him told:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your self his prowesse prov'd, and found him fiers and bold."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then sayd Cymochles: "Palmer, thou doest dote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne canst of prowesse ne of knighthood deeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save as thou seest or hearst. But well I wote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of his puissaunce tryall made extreeme:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet gold al is not that doth golden seeme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne all good knights that shake well speare and shield.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The worth of all men by their end esteeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then dew praise or dew reproch them yield;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bad therefore I him deeme that thus lies dead on field."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Good or bad," gan his brother fiers reply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"What doe I recke, sith that he dide entire?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or what doth his bad death now satisfy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The greedy hunger of revenging yre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith wrathfull hand wrought not her owne desire?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet since no way is lefte to wreake my spight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I will him reave of armes, the viftors hire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of that shield, more worthy of good knight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For why should a dead dog be deckt in armour bright?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Fayr Sir," said then the Palmer suppliaunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"For knighthoods love doe not so fowle a deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne blame your honor with so shamefull vaunt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of vile revenge. To spoile the dead of weed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is sacrilege, and doth all sinnes exceed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But leave these relicks of his living might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To decke his herce, and trap his tomb-blacke steed."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"What herce or steed" (said he) "should he have dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But be entombed in the raven or the kight?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that, rude hand upon his shield he laid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And th'other brother gan his helme unlace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both fiercely bent to have him disaraid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that they spyde where towards them did pace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An armed knight, of bold and bounteous grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose squire bore after him an heben launce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And coverd shield. Well kend him so far space</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th'enchaunter by his armes and amenaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When under him he saw his Lybian steed to praunce;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And to those brethren sayd; "Rise, rise by live,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto batteil doe your selves addresse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For yonder comes the prowest knight alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Prince Arthur, flowre of grace and nobilesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hath to Paynim knights wrought gret distresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thousand Sar'zins fowly donne to dye."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That word so deepe did in their harts impresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That both eftsoones upstarted furiously,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gan themselves prepare to batteill greedily.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But fiers Pyrochles, lacking his owne sword,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The want thereof now greatly gan to plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Archimage besought, him that afford</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he had brought for Braggadochio vaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"So would I," (said th'enchaunter) "glad and faine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beteeme to you this sword, you to defend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ought that els your honour might maintaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that this weapons powre I well have kend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be contrary to the worke which ye intend:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"For that same knights owne sword this is, of yore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Merlin made by his almightie art</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that his noursling, when he knighthood swore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith to doen his foes eternall smart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The metall first he mixt with Medaewart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That no enchauntment from his dint might save;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then it in flames of Aetna wrought apart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seven times dipped in the bitter wave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of hellish Styx, which hidden vertue to it gave.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"The vertue is, that nether steele nor stone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The stroke thereof from entraunce may defend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever may be used by his fone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne forst his rightful owner to offend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever will it breake, ne ever bend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherefore <i>Morddure</i> it rightfully is hight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In vaine therefore, Pyrochles, should I lend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The same to thee, against his lord to fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For sure yt would deceive thy labor and thy might.'</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Foolish old man," said then the Pagan wroth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"That weenest words or charms may force withstond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone shalt thou see, and then beleeve for troth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I can carve with this inchaunted brond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His Lords owne flesh." Therewith out of his hond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That vertuous steele he rudely snatcht away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Guyons shield about his wrest he bond:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So ready dight fierce battaile to assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And match his brother proud in battailous aray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By this, that straunger knight in presence came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And goodly salued them; who nought againe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him answered, as courtesie became;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with sterne lookes, and stomachous disdaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gave signes of grudge and discontentment vaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, turning to the Palmer, he gan spy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where at his feet, with sorrowfull demayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And deadly hew, an armed corse did lye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In whose dead face he redd great magnanimity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sayd he then to the Palmer: "Reverend Syre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What great misfortune hath betidd this knight?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or did his lire her fatall date expyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or did he fall by treason, or by fight?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How ever, sure I rew his pitteous plight."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Not one, nor other," sayd the Palmer grave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Hath him befalne; but cloudes of deadly night</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A while his heavy eylids cover'd have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all his sences drowned in deep sencelesse wave:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Which those his cruell foes, that stand hereby,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Making advauntage, to revenge their spight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would him disarme and treaten shamefully;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unworthie usage of redoubted knight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But you, faire Sir, whose honourable sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth promise hope of helpe and timely grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mote I beseech to succour his sad plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by your powre protect his feeble cace?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First prayse of knighthood is fowle outrage to deface."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Palmer," (said he) "no knight so rude, I weene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As to doen outrage to a sleeping ghost;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne was there ever noble corage scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in advauntage would his puissaunce bost:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Honour is least where oddes appeareth most.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May bee, that better reason will aswage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rash revengers heat. Words, well dispost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have secrete powre t'appease inflamed rage:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If not, leave unto me thy knights last patronage."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho, turning to those brethren, thus bespoke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ye warlike payre, whose valorous great might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It seemes, just wronges to vengeaunce doe provoke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wreake your wrath on this dead seeming knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mote ought allay the storme of your despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And settle patience in so furious heat?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not to debate the chalenge of your right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But for his carkas pardon I entreat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom fortune hath already laid in lowest seat."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom Cymochles said; "For what art thou,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That mak'st thy selfe his dayes-man, to prolong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The vengeaunce prest? Or who shall let me now</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On this vile body from to wreak my wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And make his carkas as the outcast dong?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why should not that dead carrion satisfye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The guilt which, if he lived had thus long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His life for dew revenge should deare abye?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The trespass still doth live, albee the person dye."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Indeed," then said the Prince, "the evill donne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dyes not, when breath the body first doth leave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But from the grandsyre to the Nephewes sonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all his seede the curse doth often cleave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till vengeaunce utterly the guilt bereave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So streightly God doth judge. But gentle Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That doth against the dead his hand upheave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His honour staines with rancour and despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And great disparagment makes to his former might."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Pyrochles gan reply the second tyme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to him said: "Now, felon, sure I read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How that thou art partaker of his cryme:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore, by Termagaunt thou shalt be dead."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that his hand, more sad then lomp of lead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uplifting high, he weened with Morddure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His owne good sword Morddure, to cleave his head.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The faithfull steele such treason no'uld endure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, swarving from the marke, his Lordes life did assure.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet was the force so furious and so fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That horse and man it made to reele asyde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nath'lesse the Prince would not forsake his sell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For well of yore he learned had to ryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But full of anger fiersly to him cryde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"False traitour! miscreaunt! thou broken hast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The law of armes to strike foe undefide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But thou thy treasons fruit, I hope, shalt taste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right sowre, and feele the law the which thou hast defast."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that his balefull speare he fiercely bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the Pagans brest, and therewith thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His cursed life out of her lodge have rent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But ere the point arrived where it ought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seven fold shield, which he from Guyon brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He cast between to ward the bitter stownd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through all those foldes the steelehead passage wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through his shoulder perst; wherwith to ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He groveling fell, all gored in his gushing wound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when his brother saw, fraught with great griefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wrath, he to him leaped furiously,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fowly saide: "By Mahoune, cursed thiefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That direfull stroke thou dearely shalt aby:"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, hurling up his harmefull blade on hy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Smote him so hugely on his haughtie crest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from his saddle forced him to fly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Els mote it needes downe to his manly brest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have cleft his head in twaine, and life thence dispossest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now was the Prince in daungerous distresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wanting his sword when he on foot should fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His single speare could doe him small redresse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against two foes of so exceeding might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The least of which was match for any knight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now the other, whom he earst did daunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had reard him selfe againe to cruel fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Three times more furious and more puissaunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unmindfull of his wound, of his fate ignoraunt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So both attonce him charge on either syde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hideous strokes and importable powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That forced him his ground to traverse wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wisely watch to ward that deadly stowre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For in his shield, as thicke as stormie showre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their strokes did raine: yet did he never quaile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nc backward shrinke, but as a stedfast towre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom foe with double battry doth assaile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Them on her bulwarke beares, and bids them nought availe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So stoutly he withstood their strong assay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that at last, when he advantage spyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His poynant speare he thrust with puissant sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At proud Cymochles, whiles his shield was wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That through his thigh the mortall steele did gryde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He, swarving with the force, within his flesh</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did breake the launce, and let the head abyde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the wound the red blood flowed fresh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That underneath his feet soone made a purple plesh.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Horribly then he gan to rage and rayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cursing his Gods, and him selfe damning deepe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Als when his brother saw the red blood rayle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adowne so fast, and all his armour steepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For very felnesse lowd he gan to weepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said; "Caytive, curse on thy cruell hond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That twise hath spedd; yet shall it not thee keepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the third brunt of this my fatall brond:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo! where the dreadfull Death behynd thy backe doth stond."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that he strooke, and thother strooke withall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nothing seemd mote beare so monstrous might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The one upon his covered shield did fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And glauncing downe would not his owner byte;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But thother did upon his troncheon smyte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which hewing quite asunder, further way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It made, and on his hacqueton did lyte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which dividing with importune sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It seizd in his right side, and there the dint did stay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Wyde was the wound, and a large lukewarme flood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Red as the Rose, thence gushed grievously;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That when the Paynym spyde the streaming blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gave him great hart and hope of victory.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On th'other side, in huge perplexity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Prince now stood, having his weapon broke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nought could he hurt, but still at warde did ly:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet with his troncheon he so rudely stroke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cymochles twise, that twise him forst his foot revoke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when the Palmer saw in such distresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir Guyon's sword he lightly to him raught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said; "Fay re Sonne, great God thy right hand blesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To use that sword so well as he it ought!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Glad was the knight, and with fresh courage fraught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When as againe he armed felt his hond:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then like a Lyon, which hath long time saught</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His robbed whelpes, and at the last them fond</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Emongst the shepeheard swaynes, then wexeth wood and yond</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So fierce he laid about him, and dealt blowes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On either side, that neither mayle could hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne shield defend the thunder of his throwes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now to Pyrochles many strokes he told;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eft to Cymochles twise so many fold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, backe againe turning his busie hond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them both atonce compeld with courage bold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To yield wide way to his hart-thrilling brond;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though they both stood stiffe, yet could not both withstond.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As salvage Bull, whom two fierce mastives bayt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When rancour doth with rage him once engore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forgets with wary warde them to awayt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with his dreadfull homes them drives afore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or flings aloft, or treades downe in the flore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Breathing out wrath, and bellowing disdaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the forest quakes to heare him rore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So rag'd Prince Arthur twixt his foemen twaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That neither could his mightie puissaunce sustaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But ever at Pyrochles when he smitt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Who Guyons shield cast ever him before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereon the Faery Queenes pourtract was writt,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His hand relented and the stroke forbore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his deare hart the picture gan adore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which oft the Paynim sav'd from deadly stowre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But him henceforth the same can save no more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For now arrived is his fatall how re,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That no'te avoyded be by earthly skill or powre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For when Cymochles saw the fowle reproch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which them appeached, prickt with guiltie shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And inward griefe, he fiercely gan approch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Resolv'd to put away that loathly blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or dye with honour and desert of fame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on the haubergh stroke the Prince so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That quite disparted all the linked frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pierced to the skin, but bit no more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet made him twise to reele, that never moov'd afore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whereat renfierst with wrath and sharp regret,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He stroke so hugely with his borrowd blade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it empierst the Pagans burganet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, cleaving the hard steele, did deepe invade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into his head, and cruell passage made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quite through his brayne. He, tombling downe on ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Breathd out his ghost, which, to th'infernall shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fast flying, there eternall torment found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all the sinnes wherewith his lewd life did abound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which, when his german saw, the stony feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ran to his hart, and all his sence dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne thenceforth life ne corage did appeare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But as a man whom hellish feendes have frayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long trembling still he stoode: at last thus sayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Traytour, what hast thou doen? How ever may</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy cursed hand so cruelly have swayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against that knight! Harrow and well away!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After so wicked deede why liv'st thou lenger day?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that all desperate, as loathing light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with revenge desyring soone to dye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Assembling all his force and utmost might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his owne swerd he fierce at him did flye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strooke, and foynd, and lasht outrageously,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withouten reason or regard. Well knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Prince, with pacience and sufferaunce sly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So hasty heat soone cooled to subdew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tho, when this breathlesse woxe, that batteil gan renew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when a windy tempest bloweth hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nothing may withstand his stormy stowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The clowdes, as thinges affrayd, before him flye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all so soone as his outrageous powre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is layd, they fiercely then begin to showre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, as in scorne of his spent stormy spight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now all attonce their malice forth do poure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So did Prince Arthur beare himselfe in fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And suffred rash Pyrochles waste his ydle might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last, when as the Sarazin perceiv'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How that straunge sword refusd to serve his neede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when he stroke most strong the dint deceiv'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He flong it from him; and, devoyd of dreed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon him lightly leaping without heed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Twixt his two mighty armes engrasped fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thinking to overthrowe and downe him tred:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But him in strength and skill the Prince surpast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And through his nimble sleight did under him down cast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nought booted it the Paynim then to strive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For as a Bittur in the Eagles clawe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That may not hope by flight to scape alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still waytes for death with dread and trembling aw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So he, now subject to the viclours law,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did not once move, nor upward cast his eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For vile disdaine and rancour, which did gnaw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His hart in twaine with sad melancholy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As one that loathed life, and yet despysd to dye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But full of princely bounty and great mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Conquerour nought cared him to slay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But casting wronges and all revenge behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More glory thought to give life then decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sayd; "Paynim, this is thy dismall day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet if thou wilt renounce thy miscreaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And my trew liegeman yield thy selfe for ay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Life will I graunt thee for thy valiaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all thy wronges will wipe out of my sovenaunce."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Foole!" (sayd the Pagan) "I thy gift defye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But use thy fortune as it doth befall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And say, that I not overcome doe dye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in despight of life for death doe call."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wroth was the Prince, and sory yet withall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he so wilfully refused grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet sith his fate so cruelly did fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His shining Helmet he gan soone unlace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And left his headlesse body bleeding all the place.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By this Sir Guyon from his traunce awakt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Life having maystered her sencelesse foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And looking up, whenas his shield he lakt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sword saw not, he wexed wondrous woe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when the Palmer, whom he long ygoe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had lost, he by him spyde, right glad he grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saide; "Deare sir, whom wandring to and fro</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I long have lackt, I joy thy face to vew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Firme is thy faith, whom daunger never fro me drew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But read, what wicked hand hath robbed mee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of my good sword and shield? "The Palmer elad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With so fresh hew uprysing him to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him answered: rayre sonne, be no whit sad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For want of weapons; they shall soone be had."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So gan he to discourse the whole debate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which that straunge knight for him sustained had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And those two Sarazins confounded late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose carcases on ground were horribly prostrate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when he heard, and saw the tokens trew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His hart with great affection was embayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the Prince, bowing with reverence dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As to the patrone of his life, thus sayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"My Lord, my liege, by whose most gratious ayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I live this day, and see my foes subdewd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What may suffice to be for meede repayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of so great graces as ye have me shewd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to be ever bound"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom the Infant thus; "Fayre Sir, what need</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Good turnes be counted as a servile bond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bind their dooers to receive their meed?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are not all knightes by oath bound to withstond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oppressours powre by armes and puissant hond?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Suffise that I have done my dew in place."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So goodly purpose they together fond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of kindnesse and of courteous aggrace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whiles false Archimage and Atin fled apace.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-9" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The house of Temperance, in which</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Doth sober Alma dwell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Besiegd of many foes, whom straunger</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Knightes to flight compell.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Of all Gods workes which doe this worlde adorne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There is no one more faire and excellent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then is mans body, both for powre and forme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles it is kept in sober government;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But none then it more fowle and indecent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Distempred through misrule and passions bace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It growes a Monster, and incontinent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth loose his dignity and native grace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold, who list, both one and other in this place.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>After the Paynim brethren conquer'd were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Briton Prince recov'ring his stolne sword,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Guyon his lost shield, they both yfere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth passed on their way in fayre accord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till him the Prince with gentle court did bord:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Sir knight, mote I of you this court'sy read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet why on your shield, so goodly scord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beare ye the picture of that Ladies head?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full lively is the semblaunt, though the substance dead."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Fayre Sir," (sayd he) "if in that pifture dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such life ye read, and vertue in vaine shew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What mote ye weene, if the trew lively-head</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that most glorious visage ye did vew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yf the beauty of her mind ye knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is, her bountie, and imperiall powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thousand times fairer then her mortall hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O! how great wonder would your thoughts devoure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And infinite desire into your spirite poure!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"She is the mighty Queene of Faery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose faire retraitt I in my shield doe beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee is the flowre of grace and chastity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throughout the world, renowmed far and neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My liefe, my liege, my Soveraine, my deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose glory shineth as the morning starre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with her light the earth enlumines cleare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far reach her mercies, and her praises farre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As well in state of peace, as puissaunce in warre."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Thrise happy man," (said then the Briton knight)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Whom gracious lott and thy great valiaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have made thee soldier of that Princesse bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with her bounty and glad countenaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth blesse her servaunts, and them high advaunce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How may straunge knight hope ever to aspire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By faithfull service and meete amenaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto such blisse? sufficient were that hire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For losse of thousand lives, to die at her desire."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Said Guyon, "Noble Lord, what meed so great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or grace of earthly Prince so soveraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by your wondrous worth and warlike feat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye well may hope, and easely attaine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But were your will her sold to entertaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And numbred be mongst knights of Maydenhed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great guerdon, well I wote, should you remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in her favor high bee reckoned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Arthegall and Sophy now beene honored."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Certes," (then said the Prince) "I God avow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sith I armes and knighthood first did plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My whole desire hath beene, and yet is now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To serve that Queene with al my powre and might.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seven times the Sunne, with his lamp-burning light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath walkte about the world, and I no lesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith of that Goddesse I have sought the sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet no where can her find: such happinesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heven doth to me envy, and fortune favourlesse."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Fortune, the foe of famous chevisaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seldom" (said Guyon) "yields to vertue aide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in her way throwes mischiefe and mischaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereby her course is stopt and passage staid:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But you, faire Sir, be not herewith dismaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But constant keepe the way in which ye stand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, were it not that I am els delaid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hard adventure which I have in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I labour would to guide you through al Faery land."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Gramercy Sir," said he; "but mote I weete</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What straunge adventure doe ye now pursew?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perhaps my succour or advizement meete</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mote stead you much your purpose to subdew."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan Sir Guyon all the story shew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of false Acrasia, and her wicked wiles;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to avenge the Palmer him forth drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From Faery court. So talked they, the whiles</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They wasted had much way, and measurd many miles.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now faire Phoebus gan decline in haste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His weary wagon to the Westerne vale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whenas they spide a goodly castle, plaste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Foreby a river in a pleasaunt dale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which choosing for that evenings hospitale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They thither marcht: but when they came in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from their sweaty Coursers did avale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They found the gates fast barred long ere night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every loup fast lockt, as fearing foes despight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when they saw, they weened fowle reproch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was to them doen, their entraunce to forestall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that the Squire gan nigher to approch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wind his home under the castle wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with the noise it shooke as it would fall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones forth looked from the highest spire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The watch, and lowd unto the knights did call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weete what they so rudely did require?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who gently answered, They entraunce did desire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Fly fly, good knights," (said he) "fly fast away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If that your lives ye love, as meete ye should;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fly fast, and save your selves from neare decay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here may ye not have entraunce, though we would:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We would, and would againe, if that we could;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But thousand enemies about us rave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with long siege us in the castle hould.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seven yeares this wize they us besieged have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many good knights slaine that have us sought to save."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus as he spoke, loe! with outragious cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A thousand villeins rownd about them swarmd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the rockes and caves adjoyning nye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vile caitive wretches, ragged, rude, deformd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All threatning death, all in straunge manner armd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some with unweldy clubs, some with long speares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some rusty knifes, some staves in fier warmd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sterne was their looke; like wild amazed steares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Staring with hollow eies, and stiffe upstanding heares.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Fiersly at first those knights they did assayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And drove them to recoile; but when againe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They gave fresh charge, their forces gan to fayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unhable their encounter to sustaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For with such puissaunce and impetuous maine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those Champions broke on them, that forst them fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like scattered Sheepe, whenas the Shepherds swain e</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Lyon and a Tigre doth espye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With greedy pace forth rushing from the forest nye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A while they fled, but soone retournd againe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With greater fury then before was fownd J</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evermore their cruell Capitaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sought with his raskall routs t'enclose them rownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, overronne, to tread them to the grownd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But soone the knights with their bright burning blades</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Broke their rude troupes, and orders did confownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hewing and slashing at their idle shades;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For though they bodies seem, yet substaunce from them fades.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when a swarme of Gnats at eventide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the fennes of Allan doe arise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their murmuring small trompetts sownden wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles in the aire their clustring army flies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That as a cloud doth seeme to dim the skies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne man nor beast may rest, or take repast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For their sharpe wounds and noyous injuries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till the fierce Northerne wind with blustring blast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth blow them quite away, and in the Ocean cast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus when they had that troublous rout disperst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the castle gate they come againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And entraunce crav'd which was denied erst.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now when report of that their perlous paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And combrous conflict which they did sustaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came to the Ladies eare which there did dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee forth issewed with a goodly traine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Squires and Ladies equipaged well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And entertained them right fairely, as befell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Alma she called was; a virgin bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That had not yet felt Cupides wanton rage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was shee woo d or many a gentle knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many a Lord of noble parentage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sought with her to lincke in marriage:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For shee was faire as faire mote ever bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the flowre now of her freshest age;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet full of grace and goodly modestee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That even heven rejoyced her sweete face to see.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In robe of lilly white she was arayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from her shoulder to her heele downe raught;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The traine whereof loose far behind her strayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Braunched with gold and perle most richly wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And borne of two faire Damsels which were taught</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That service well. Her yellow golden heare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was trimly woven and in tresses wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne other tire she on her head did weare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But crowned with a garland of sweete Rosiere.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Goodly shee entertaind those noble knights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And brought them up into her castle hall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where gentle court and gracious delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee to them made, with mildnesse virginall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shewing her selfe both wise and liberall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, when they rested had a season dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They her besought of favour speciall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that faire Castle to affoord them vew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shee graunted; and, them leading forth, the same did shew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>First she them led up to the Castle wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was so high as foe might not it clime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all so faire and fensible withall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not built of bricke, ne yet of stone and lime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But of thing like to that Egyptian slime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof king Nine whilome built Babell towre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But O great pitty! that no lenger time</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So goodly workemanship should not endure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soone it must turne to earth; no earthly thing is sure.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The frame thereof seemd partly circulare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And part triangulare; O worke divine!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those two the first and last proportions are;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The one imperfect, mortall, foeminine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th'other immortall, perfect, masculine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And twixt them both a quadrate was the base,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proportiond equally by seven and nine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nine was the circle sett in heavens place:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All which compacted made a goodly Diapase.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therein two gates were placed seemly well:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The one before, by which all in did pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did th'other far in workmanship excell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For not of wood, nor of enduring bras,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But of more worthy substance fram'd it was:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doubly disparted, it did locke and close,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That when it locked none might thorough pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when it opened, no man might it close,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still open to their friendes, and closed to their foes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Of hewen stone the porch was fayrely wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stone more of valew, and more smooth and fine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Jett or Marble far from Ireland brought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over the which was cast a wandring vine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enchaced with a wanton yvie twine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And over it a fayre Portcullis hong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to the gate direclly did incline</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With comely compasse and compa ure strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nether unseemly short, nor yet exceeding long.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Within the Barbican a Porter sate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Day and night duely keeping watch and ward;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor wight nor word mote passe out of the gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in good order, and with dew regard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Utterers of secrets he from thence debard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bablers of folly, and blazers of cryme:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His larumbell might lowd and wyde be hard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When cause requyrd, but never out of time;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Early and late it rong, at evening and at prime.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And rownd about the porch on every syde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Twise sixteene warders satt, all armed bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In glistring steele, and strongly fortifyde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tall yeomen seemed they and of great might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And were enraunged ready still for fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By them as Alma passed with her guestes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They did obeysaunce, as beseemed right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then againe retourned to their restes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Porter eke to her did lout with humble gestes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thence she them brought into a stately Hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein were many tables fayre dispred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ready dight with drapets festivall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the viaundes should be ministred.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At th'upper end there sate, yclad in red</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Downe to the ground, a comely personage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in his hand a white rod menaged:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He Steward was, hight Diet; rype of age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in demeanure sober, and in counsell sage.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And through the Hall there walked to and fro</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A jolly yeoman, Marshall of the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose name was Appetite: he did bestow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both guestes and meate, when ever in they came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And knew them how to order without blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As him the Steward badd. They both attone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did dewty to their Lady, as became;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, passing by, forth ledd her guestes anone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the kitchin rowme, ne spard for nicenesse none.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It was a vaut ybuilt for great dispence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With many raunges reard along the wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And one great chimney, whose long tonnell thence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The smoke forth threw. And in the midst of all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There placed was a caudron wide and tall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a mightie fornace, burning whott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More whott then Aetn', or flaming Mongiball;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For day and night it brent, ne ceased not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So long as any thing it in the caudron gott.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But to delay the heat, least by mischaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It might breake out and set the whole on fvre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There added was by goodly ordinaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An huge great payre of bellowes, which did styre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Continually, and cooling breath inspyre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About the Caudron many Cookes accoyld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hookes and ladles, as need did requyre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whyles the viaundes in the vessell boyld</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They did about their businesse sweat, and sorely toyld.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The maister Cooke was cald Concoction;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A carefull man, and full of comely guyse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The kitchin clerke, that hight Digestion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did order all th'Achates in seemely wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And set them forth, as well he could devise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rest had severall offices assynd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some to remove the scum as it did rise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Others to beare the same away did mynd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And others it to use according to his kynd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But all the liquour, which was fowle and waste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not good nor serviceable elles for ought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They in another great rownd vessell plaste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till by a conduit pipe it thence were brought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the rest, that noyous was and nought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By secret wayes, that none might it espy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was close convaid, and to the backgate brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That cleped was Port Esquiline, whereby</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was avoided quite, and throwne out privily.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which goodly order and great workmans skill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whenas those knightes beheld, with rare delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gazing wonder they their mindes did fill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For never had they scene so straunge a sight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence backe againe faire Alma led them right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soone into a goodly Parlour brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was with royall arras richly dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which was nothing pourtrahed nor wrought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not wrought nor pourtrahed, but easie to be thought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And in the midst thereof upon the floure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A lovely bevy of faire Ladies sate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Courted of many a jolly Paramoure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which them did in modest wise amate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And each one sought his Lady to aggrate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke emongst them litle Cupid playd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His wanton sportes, being retourned late</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From his fierce warres, and having from him layd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His cruel bow, wherewith he thousands hath dismayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Diverse delights they fownd them selves to please;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some song in sweet consort; some laught for joy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some plaid with strawes; some ydly satt at ease;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But other some could not abide to toy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All pleasaunce was to them griefe and annoy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This fround, that faund, the third for shame did blush,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another seemed envious or coy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another in her teeth did gnaw a rush;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But at these straungers presence every one did hush.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as the gracious Alma came in place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They all attonce out of their seates arose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to her homage made with humble grace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when the knights beheld, they gan dispose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Themselves to court, and each a damzell chose.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Prince by chaunce did on a Lady light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was right faire and fresh as morning rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But somwhat sad and solemne eke in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if some pensive thought constraind her gentle spright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In a long purple pall, whose skirt with gold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was fretted all about, she was arayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in her hand a Poplar braunch did hold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom the Prince in courteous maner sayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Gentle Madame, why beene ye thus dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And your faire beautie doe with sadnes spill?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lives any that you hath thus ill apayd?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or doen you love? or doen you lack your will?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What ever bee the cause, it sure beseemes you ill."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Fayre Sir," said she, halfe in disdaineful wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"How is it that this mood in me ye blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in your selfe doe not the same advise?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him ill beseemes anothers fault to name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That may un wares bee blotted with the same:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pensive I yeeld I am, and sad in mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through great desire of glory and of fame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought, I weene, are ye therein behynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That have three years sought one, yet no where can her find.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Prince was inly moved at her speach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well weeting trew what she had rashly told;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet with faire semblaunt sought to hyde the breach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which chaunge of colour did perforce unfold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now seeming flaming whott, now stony cold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, turning soft aside, he did inquyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What wight she was that Poplar braunch did hold?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It answered was, her name was Prays-desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That by well doing sought to honour to aspyre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The whyles the Faery knight did entertayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another Damsell of that gentle crew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was right fayre and modest of demayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that too oft she chaung'd her native hew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Straunge was her tyre, and all her garment blew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Close rownd about her tuckt with many a plight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon her fist the bird, which shonneth vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And keepes in coverts close from living wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did sitt, as yet ashamd how rude Pan did her dight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So long as Guyon with her commoned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the grownd she cast her modest eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever and anone with rosy red</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bashfull blood her snowy cheekes did dye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her became, as polisht yvory</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which cunning Craftesman hand hath overlayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With fayre vermilion or pure Castory.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great wonder had the knight to see the mayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So straungely passioned, and to her gently said:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Fayre Damzell, seemeth by your troubled cheare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That either me too bold ye weene, this wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You to molest, or other ill to feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in the secret of your hart close lyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whence it doth, as cloud from sea, aryse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If it be I, of pardon I you pray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if ought else that I mote not devyse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I will, if please you it discure, assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To ease you of that ill, so wisely as I may."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She answerd nought, but more abasht for shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Held downe her head, the whiles her lovely face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The flashing blood with blushing did inflame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the strong passion mard her modest grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Guyon mervayld at her uncouth cace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till Alma him bespake: "Why wonder yee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Sir, at that which ye so much embrace?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She is the fountaine of your modestee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You shamefast are, but Shamefastnes it selfe is shee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereat the Elfe did blush in privitee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And turnd his face away; but she the same</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dissembled faire, and faynd to oversee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus they awhile with court and goodly game</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Themselves did solace each one with his Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that great Lady thence away them sought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To vew her Castles other wondrous frame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Up to a stately Turret she them brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ascending by ten steps of Alabaster wrought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That Turrets frame most admirable was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like highest heaven compassed around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lifted high above this earthly masse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which it survewd as hils doen lower ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But not on ground mote like to this be found:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not that, which antique Cadmus whylome built</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Thebes, which Alexander did confound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor that proud towre of Troy, though richly guilt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From which young Hectors blood by cruell Greekes was spilt,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The roofe hereof was arched over head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And deckt with flowers and herbars daintily:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two goodly Beacons, set in watches stead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therein gave light, and flamd continually;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For they of living fire most subtilly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were made, and set in silver sockets bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cover'd with lids deviz'd of substance sly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That readily they shut and open might.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O! who can tell the prayses of that makers might?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne can I tell, ne can I stay to tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This parts great workemanship and wondrous powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all this other worldes worke doth excell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And likest is unto that heavenly towre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That God hath built for his owne blessed bowre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therein were divers rowmes, and divers stages;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But three the chiefest and of greatest powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which there dwelt three honorable sages,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wisest men, I weene, that lived in their ages.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Not he, whom Greece, the Nourse of all good arts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By Phoebus doome the wisest thought alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might be compar'd to these by many parts:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor that sage Pylian syre, which did survive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Three ages, such as mortall men contrive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By whose advise old Priams cittie fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With these in praise of pollicies mote strive.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These three in these three rowmes did sondry dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And counselled faire Alma how to governe well.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The first of them could things to come foresee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The next could of thinges present best advize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The third things past could keep in memoree:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that no time nor reason could arize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that the same could one of these comprize.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For-thy the first did in the forepart sit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nought mote hinder his quicke prejudize:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He had a sharpe foresight and working wit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That never idle was, ne once would rest a whit.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His chamber was dispainted all within</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sondry colours, in the which were writ</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Infinite shapes of thinges dispersed thin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some such as in the world were never yit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne can devized be of mortall wit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some daily scene and knowen by their names,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as in idle fantasies do flit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Infernall Hags, Centaurs, feendes, Hippodames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Apes, Lyons, Aegles, Owles, fooles, lovers, children, Dames.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And all the chamber filled was with flyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which buzzed all about, and made such sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they encombred all mens cares and eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like many swarmes of Bees assembled round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After their hives with honny do abound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All those were idle thoughtes and fantasies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Devices, dreames, opinions unsound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shewes, visions, sooth-sayes, and prophesies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all that fained is, as leasings, tales, and lies.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Emongst them all sate he which wonned there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hight Phantastes by his nature trew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A man of yeares yet fresh, as mote appere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of swarth complexion, and of crabbed hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That him full of melancholy did shew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bent hollow beetle browes, sharpe staring eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That mad or foolish seemd: one by his vew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mote deeme him borne with ill-disposed skyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When oblique Saturne sate in th' house of agonyes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom Alma having shewed to her guestes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence brought them to the second rowme, whose wals</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were painted faire with memorable gestes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of famous Wisards; and with picturals</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Magistrates, of courts, of tribunals,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of commen-wealthes, of states, of pollicy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of lawes, of judgementes, and of decretals,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All artes, all science, all Philosophy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all that in the world was ay thought wittily.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Of those that rowme was full; and them among</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There sate a man of ripe and perfect age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who did them meditate all his life long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That through continuall practise and usage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He now was growne right wise and wondrous sage:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great pleasure had those straunger knightes to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His goodly reason and grave personage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That his disciples both desyrd to bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Alma thence them led to th' hindmost rowme of three.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That chamber seemed ruinous and old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therefore was removed far behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet were the wals, that did the same uphold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right firme and strong, though somwhat they declind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therein sat an old old man, halfe blind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all decrepit in his feeble corse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet lively vigour rested in his mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And recompenst them with a better scorse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weake body wel is chang'd for minds redoubled forse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This man of infinite remembraunce was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And things foregone through many ages held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he recorded still as they did pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne suffred them to perish through long eld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As all things els the which this world doth weld;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But laid them up in his immortall scrine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where they for ever incorrupted dweld:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The warres he well remembred of king Nine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of old Assaracus, and Inachus divine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The yeares of Nestor nothing were to his,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne yet Mathusalem, though longest liv'd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he remembred both their infancis:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne wonder then, if that he were depriv'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of native strength now that he them surviv'd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His chamber all was hangd about with rolls</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And old records from auncient times derivd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some made in books, some in long parchment scrolls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That were all worm-eaten and full of canker holes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Amidst them all he in a chaire was sett,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tossing and turning them withouten end;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But for he was unhable them to fett,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A litle boy did on him still attend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To reach, when ever he for ought did send;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oft when thinges were lost, or laid amis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That boy them sought and unto him did lend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore he Anamnestes cleped is;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that old man Eumnestes, by their propertis.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The knightes there entring did him reverence dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wondred at his endlesse exercise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then as they gan his Library to vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And antique Regesters for to avise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There chaunced to the Princes hand to rize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An auncient booke, hight <i>Briton moniments</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of this lands first conquest did devize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And old division into Regiments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till it reduced was to one mans governements.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sir Guyon chaunst eke on another booke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hight <i>Antiquitee of Faery lond</i>:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which whenas he greedily did looke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th'ofspring of Elves and Faeryes there he fond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As it delivered was from hond to hond:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat they, burning both with fervent fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their countreys auncestry to understond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Crav'd leave of Alma and that aged sire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To read those bookes; who gladly graunted their desire.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-10" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>A chronicle of Briton kings,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">From Brute to Uthers rayne.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And rolls of Elfin Emperours,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Till time of Gloriane.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Who now shall give unto me words and sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Equall unto this haughtie enterprise?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or who shall lend me wings, with which from ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My lowly verse may loftily arise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lift it selfe unto the highest skies?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More ample spirit then hitherto was wount</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here needes me, whiles the famous auncestries</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of my most dreaded Soveraigne I recount,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By which all earthly Princes she doth far surmount.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne under Sunne that shines so wide and faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence all that lives does borrow life and light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lives ought that to her linage may compaire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which though from earth it be derived right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet doth it selfe stretch forth to hevens hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the world with wonder overspred;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A labor huge, exceeding far my might.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How shall fraile pen, with feare disparaged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conceive such soveraine glory and great bountyhed?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Argument worthy of Maeonian quill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or rather worthy of great Phoebus rote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereon the ruines of great Ossa hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And triumphes of Phlegraean Jove, he wrote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the Gods admird his lofty note.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if some relish of that hevenly lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His learned daughters would to me report</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To decke my song withall, I would assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy name, O soveraine Queene! to blazon far away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thy name, O soveraine Queene! thy realme and race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From this renowmed Prince derived arre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who mightily upheld that royall mace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which now thou beaf'st, to thee descended farre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From mighty kings and conquerours in warre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy fathers and great Grandfathers of old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose noble deeds above the Northerne starre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Immortall fame for ever hath enrold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in that old mans booke they were in order told.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The land which warlike Britons now possesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therein have their mighty empire raysd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In antique times was salvage wildernesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unpeopled, unmannurd, unprovd, unpraysd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne was it Island then, ne was it paysd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amid the ocean waves, ne was it sought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of merchants farre for profits therein praysd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But was all desolate, and of some thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By sea to have bene from the Celticke mayn-land brought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne did it then deserve a name to have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that the venturous Mariner that way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Learning his ship from those white rocks to save,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which all along the Southerne sea-coast lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Threatning unheedy wrecke and rash decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For safety that same his sea-marke made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And namd it <b>Albion</b>: But later day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Finding in it fit ports for fishers trade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gan more the same frequent, and further to invade.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But far in land a salvage nation dwelt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of hideous Giaunts, and halfe beastly men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That never tasted grace, nor goodnes felt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wild like beastes lurking in loathsome den,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And flying fast as Roebucke through the fen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All naked without shame or care of cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By hunting and by spoiling liveden;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of stature huge, and eke of corage bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That sonnes of men amazd their sternnesse to behold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But whence they sprong, or how they were begott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uneath is to assure; uneath to wene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That monstrous error, which doth some assott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Dioclesians fifty daughters shene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into this land by chaunce have driven bene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where, companing with feends and filthy Sprights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through vaine illusion of their lust unclene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They brought forth Geaunts, and such dreadful wights</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As far exceeded men in their immeasurd mights.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They held this land, and with their filthinesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Polluted this same gentle soyle long time;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That their owne mother loathd their beastlinesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gan abhorre her broods unkindly crime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All were they borne of her owne native slime:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until that Brutus, anciently deriv'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From roiall stocke of old Assaracs line,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Driven by fatall error here arriv'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And them of their unjust possession depriv'd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But ere he had established his throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And spred his empire to the utmost shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He fought great batteils with his salvage fone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which he them defeated evermore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many Giaunts left on groning flore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That well can witnes yet unto this day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The westerne Hogh, besprincled with the gore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of mighty Goemot, whome in stout fray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Corineus conquered, and cruelly did slay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And eke that ample Pitt, yet far renownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the large leape which Debon did compell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Coulin to make, being eight lugs of grownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the which retourning backe he fell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But those three monstrous stones doe most excell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which that huge sonne of hideous Albion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose father Hercules in Fraunce did quell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great Godmer threw, in fierce contention,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At bold Canutus; but of him was slaine anon.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In meed of these great conquests by them gott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Corineus had that Province utmost west</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To him assigned for his worthy lott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which of his name and memorable gest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He called Cornwaile, yet so called best;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Debons shayre was that is Devonshyre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Canute had his portion from the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which he cald Canutium, for his hyre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now Cantium, which Kent we comenly inquyre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus Brute this Realme unto his rule subdewd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And raigned long in great felicity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lov'd of his freends, and of his foes eschewd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He left three sonnes, his famous progeny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Borne of fay re Inogene of Italy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst whom he parted his imperiall state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Locrine left chiefe Lord of Britany.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last ripe age bad him surrender late</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His life, and long good fortune, unto finall fate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Locrine was left the soveraine Lord of all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Albanacl had all the Northerne part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which of himselfe Albania he did call;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Camber did possesse the Westerne quart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Severne now from Logris aoth depart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And each his portion peaceably enjoyd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne was there outward breach, nor grudge in hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That once their quiet government annoyd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But each his paynes to others profit still employd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Untill a nation straunge, with visage swart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And corage fierce that all men did affray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which through the world then swarmd in every part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And overflowd all countries far away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like Noyes great flood, with their importune sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This land invaded with like violence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did themselves through all the North display:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill that Locrine for his Realmes defence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did head against them make and strong munificence.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He them encountred, a confused rout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Foreby the River that whylome was hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The ancient Abus, where with courage stout</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He them defeated in victorious fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chaste so fiercely after fearefull flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That forst their chiefetain, for his safeties sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Their Chiefetain Humber named was aright,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the mighty streame him to betake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where he an end of batteill and of life did make.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The king retourned proud of victory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And insolent wox through unwonted ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shortly he forgot the jeopardy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which in his land he lately did appease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fell to vaine voluptuous disease:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He lov'd faire Ladie Estrild, leudly lov'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose wanton pleasures him too much did please,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That quite his hart from Guendolene remov'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Guendolene his wife, though alwaies faithful prov'd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The noble daughter of Corineus</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would not endure to bee so vile disdaind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, gathering force and corage valorous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Encountred him in batteill well ordaind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which him vanquisht she to fly constraind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she so fast pursewd, that him she tooke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And threw in bands, where he till death remaind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Als his faire Leman flying through a brooke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She overhent, nought moved with her piteous looke;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But both her selfe, and eke her daughter deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Begotten by her kingly Paramoure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The faire Sabrina, almost dead with feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She there attached, far from all succoure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The one she slew upon the present floure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the sad virgin, innocent of all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adowne the rolling river she did poure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which of her name now Severne men do call:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such was the end that to disloyall love did fall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then for her sonne, which she to Locrin bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Madan was young, unmeet the rule to sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In her owne hand the crowne she kept in store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till ryper years he raught and stronger stay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">During which time her powre she did display</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through all this Realme, the glory of her sex,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And first taught men a woman to obay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when her sonne to mans estate did wex,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She it surrendred, ne her selfe would lenger vex.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho Madan raignd, unworthie of his race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For with all shame that sacred throne he fild.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Next Memprise, as unworthy of that place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which being consorted with Manild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thirst of single kingdom him he kild.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Ebranck salved both their infamies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With noble deedes, and warreyd on Brunchild</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Renault, where yet of his victories</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brave moniments remaine, which yet that land envies.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>An happy man in his first dayes he was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And happy father of faire progeny:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all so many weekes as the yeare has,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So many children he did multiply:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which were twentie sonnes, which did apply</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their mindes to prayse and chevalrous desyre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those germans did subdew all Germany,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whom it hight; but in the end their Syre</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With foule repulse from Fraunce was forced to retyre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which blott his sonne succeeding in his seat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The second Brute, the second both in name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke in semblaunce of his puissaunce great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right well recur'd, and did away that blame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With recompence of everlasting fame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He with his victour sword first opened</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bowels of wide Fraunce, a forlorne Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And taught her first how to be conquered;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since which, with sondrie spoiles she hath been ransacked.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Let Scaldis tell, and let tell Hania,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And let the marsh of Esthambruges tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What colour were their waters that same day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the moore twixt Elversham and Dell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With blood of Henalois which therein fell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How oft that day did sad Brunchildis see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The greene shield dyde in dolorous vermeil?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That not <i>Scuith guiridh</i> it mote seeme to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But rather <i>y scuith gogh</i>, signe of sad crueltee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His sonne, king Leill, by fathers labour long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enjoy'd an heritage of lasting peace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And built Cairleill, and built Cairleon strong.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Next Huddibras his realme did not encrease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But taught the land from wearie wars to cease:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose footsteps Bladud following, in artes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Exceld at Athens all the learned preace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whence he brought them to these salvage parts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with sweet science mollifide their stubborne harts.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ensample of his wondrous faculty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behold the boyling bathes at Cairbadon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which seeth with secret fire eternally,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in their entrailles, full of quick Brimston,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nourish the flames which they are warmd upon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to their people wealth they forth do well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And health to every forreyne nation:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet he at last, contending to excell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The reach of men, through flight into fond mischief fell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Next him king Leyr in happie peace long raynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But had no issue male him to succeed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But three faire daughters, which were well uptraind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In all that seemed fitt for kingly seed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst whom his realme he equally decreed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To have divided. Tho, when feeble age</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nigh to his utmost date he saw proceed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He cald his daughters, and with speeches sage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inquyrd, which of them most did love her parentage?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The eldest, Gonorill, gan to protest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she much more than her owne life him lov'd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Regan greater love to him profest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then all the world, when ever it were proov'd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Cordeill said she lov'd him as behoov'd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose simple answere, wanting colours fayre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To paint it forth, him to displeasaunce moov'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in his crown he counted her no hayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But twixt the other twain his kingdom whole did shayre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So wedded th'one to Maglan king of Scottes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thother to the king of Cambria,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And twixt them shayrd his realme by equall lottes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But without dowre the wise Cordelia</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was sent to Aggannip of Celtica.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their aged Syre, thus eased of his crowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A private life ledd in Albania</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Gonorill, long had in great renowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That nought him griev'd to beene from rule deposed downe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But true it is that, when the oyle is spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The light goes out, and weeke is throwne away:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So, when he had resignd his regiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His daughter gan despise his drouping day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wearie wax of his continuall stay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho to his daughter Regan he repayrd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who him as first well used every way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when of his departure she despayrd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her bountie she abated, and his cheare empayrd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The wretched man gan then avise too late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That love is not where most it is profest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Too truely tryde in his extremest state.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last, resolv'd likewise to prove the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He to Cordelia him selfe addrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who with entyre affection him receav'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As for her Syre and king her seemed best;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after all an army strong she leav'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To war on those which him had of his realme bereav'd,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So to his crowne she him restord againe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which he dyde, made ripe for death by eld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after wild it should to her remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who peaceably the same long time did weld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all mens harts in dew obedience held;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that her sisters children, woxen strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through proud ambition against her rebeld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And overcommen kept in prison long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till weary of that wretched life her selfe she hong.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then gan the bloody brethren both to raine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But fierce Cundah gan shortly to envy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His brother Morgan, prickt with proud disdaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To have a pere in part of soverainty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And kindling coles of cruell enmity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Raisd warre, and him in batteill overthrew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence as he to those woody hilles did fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which hight of him Glamorgan, there him slew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then did he raigne alone, when he none equall knew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His sonne Rivall' his dead rowme did supply;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In whose sad time blood did from heaven rayne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Next great Gurgustus, then faire Caecily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In constant peace their kingdomes did contayne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After whom Lago, and Kinmarke did rayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Gorbogud, till far in years he grew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then his ambitious sonnes unto them twayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arraught the rule, and from their father drew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stout Ferrex and sterne Porrex him in prison threw.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But O! the greedy thirst of royall crowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That knowes no kinred, nor regardes no right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stird Porrex up to put his brother downe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, unto him assembling forreigne might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made warre on him, and fell him selfe in fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose death t'avenge, his mother mercilesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most mercilesse of women, Wyden hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her other sonne fast sleeping did oppresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with most cruell hand him murdred pittilesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Here ended Brutus sacred progeny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which had seven hundred yeares this scepter borne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With high renowme and great felicity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The noble braunch from th'antique stocke was torne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through discord, and the roiall throne forlorne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thenceforth this Realme was into factions rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilest each of Brutus boasted to be borne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in the end was left no moniment</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Brutus, nor of Britons glorie auncient.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then up arose a man of matchlesse might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wondrous wit to menage high affayres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, stird with pitty of the stressed plight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of this sad realme, cut into sondry shayres</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By such as claymd themselves Brutes rightfull hayres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gathered the Princes of the people loose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To taken counsell of their common cares;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, with his wisedom won, him streight did choose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their king, and swore him fealty to win or loose.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then made he head against his enimies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Ymner slew of Logris miscreate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Ruddoc and proud Stater, both allyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This of Albany newly nominate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that of Cambry king confirmed late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He overthrew through his owne valiaunce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose countries he redus'd to quiet state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shortly brought to civile governaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now one, which earst were many made through variaunce.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then made he sacred lawes, which some men say</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were unto him reveald in vision;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which he freed the Travellers high-way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Churches part, and Ploughmans portion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Restraining stealth and strong extortion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gratious Numa of great Britany;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For till his dayes, the chiefe dominion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By strength was wielded without pollicy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore he first wore crowne of gold for dignity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Donwallo dyde, (for what may live for ay?)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And left two sonnes, of pearelesse prowesse both,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sacked Rome too dearely did assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The recompence of their perjured oth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ransackt Greece wel tryde, when they were wroth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besides subjected France and Germany,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which yet their praises speake, all be they loth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And inly tremble at the memory</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Brennus and Belinus, kinges of Britany.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Next them did Gurgiunt, great Belinus sonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In rule succeede, and eke in fathers praise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He Easterland subdewd, and Denmarke wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of them both did foy and tribute raise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which was dew in his dead fathers daies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He also gave to fugitives of Spayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom he at sea found wandring from their waies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A seate in Ireland safely to remayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which they should hold of him, as subject to Britayne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>After him raigned Guitheline his hayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The justest man and trewest in his daies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who had to wife Dame Mertia the fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A woman worthy of immortall praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which for this Realme found many goodly layes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wholesome Statutes to her husband brought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her many deemd to have beene of the Fayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As was Aegerie that Numa tought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those yet of her be Mertian lawes both nam'd and thought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her sonne Sisillus after her did rayne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then Kimarus; and then Danius:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Next whom Morindus did the crowne sustayne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, had he not with wrath outrageous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cruell rancour dim'd his valorous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mightie deedes, should matched have the best</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As well in that same field victorious</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the forreine Morands he exprest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet lives his memorie, though carcas sleepe in rest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Five sonnes he left, begotten of one wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which successively by turnes did rayne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First Gorboman, a man of vertuous life;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Next Archigald, who for his proud disdayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deposed was from princedome soverayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pitteous Elidure put in his sted;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who shortly it to him restord agayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till by his death he it recovered:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Peridure and Vigent him disthronized.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In wretched prison long he did remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till they outraigned had their utmost date,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then therein reseized was againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ruled long with honorable state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till he surrendered Realme and life to fate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then all the sonnes of these five brethren raynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By dew successe, and all their Nephewes late;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even thrise eleven descents the crowne retaynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till aged Hely by dew heritage it gaynd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He had two sonnes, whose eldest, called Lud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Left of his life most famous memory,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And endlesse moniments of his great good:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The ruin'd wals he did reaedifye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Troynovant, gainst force of enimy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And built that gate which of his name is hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which he lyes entombed solemnly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He left two sonnes, too young to rule aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Androgeus and Tenantius, pictures of his might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whilst they were young, Cassibalane, their Eme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was by the people chosen in their sted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who on him tooke the roiall Diademe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And goodly well long time it governed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till the prowde Romanes him disquieted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And warlike Caesar, tempted with the name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of this sweet Island never conquered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And envying the Britons blazed fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(O hideous hunger of dominion!) hither came.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet twise they were repulsed backe againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And twise renforst backe to their ships to fly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles with blood they all the shore did staine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the gray Ocean into purple dy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne had they footing found at last, perdie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had not Androgeus, false to native soyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And envious of Uncles soveraintie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Betrayd his countrey unto forreine spoyle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nought els but treason from the first this land did foyle.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So by him Caesar got the victory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through great bloodshed and many a sad assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which himselfe was charged heavily</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of hardy Nennius, whom he yet did slay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But lost his sword, yet to be scene this day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thenceforth this land was tributarie made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T'ambitious Rome, and did their rule obay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till Arthur all that reckoning defrayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet oft the Briton kings against them strongly swayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Next him Tenantius raignd; them Kimbeline,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What time th'eternall Lord in fleshly slime</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enwombed was, from wretched Adams line</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To purge away the guilt of sinfull crime.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O joyous memorie of happy time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That heavenly grace so plenteously displayd!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(O too high ditty for my simple rime!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone after this the Romanes him warrayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that their tribute he refusd to let be payd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Good Claudius, that next was Emperour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An army brought, and with him batteile fought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which the king was by a Treachetour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disguised slaine, ere any thereof thought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet ceased not the bloody fight for ought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Arvirage his brothers place supplyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both in his armes and crowne, and by that draught</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did drive the Romanes to the weaker syde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they to peace agreed. So all was pacifyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Was never king more highly magnifide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor dredd of Romanes, then was Arvirage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which the Emperour to him allide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His daughter Genuiss' in marriage:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet shortly he renounst the vassallage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Rome againe, who hither hastly sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vespasian, that with great spoile and rage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forwasted all, till Genuissa gent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Persuaded him to ceasse, and her lord to relent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He dide; and him succeeded Marius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who joy'd his dayes in great tranquillity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Coyll; and after him good Lucius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That first received Christianity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sacred pledge of Christes Evangely.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet true it is, that long before that day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hither came Joseph of Arimathy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who brought with him the holy grayle, they say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And preacht the truth; but since it greatly did decay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This good king shortly without issew dide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof great trouble in the kingdome grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That did her selfe in sondry parts divide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with her powre her owne selfe overthrew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilest Romanes daily did the weake subdew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which seeing, stout Bunduca up arose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And taking armes the Britons to her drew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With whom she marched streight against her foes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And them unwares besides the Severne did enclose.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There she with them a cruell batteill tryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not with so good successe as shee deserv'd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By reason that the Captaines on her syde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Corrupted by Paulinus, from her swerv'd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, such as were through former flight preserv'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gathering againe, her Host she did renew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with fresh corage on the victor servd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But being all defeated, save a few,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rather then fly, or be captiv'd, her selfe she slew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O famous moniment of womens prayse!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Matchable either to Semiramis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom antique history so high doth rayse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or to Hypsiphil', or to Thomiris.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her Host two hundred thousand numbred is;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, whiles good fortune favoured her might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Triumphed oft against her enemis;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet, though overcome in haplesse fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shee triumphed on death, in enemies despight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her reliques Fulgent having gathered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fought with Severus, and him overthrew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet in the chace was slaine of them that fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So made them victors whome he did subdew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan Carausius tirannize anew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gainst the Romanes bent their proper powre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But him Allectus treacherously slew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tooke on him the robe of Emperoure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nath'lesse the same enjoyed but short happy howre:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For Asclepiodate him overcame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And left inglorious on the vanquisht playne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without or robe or rag to hide his shame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then afterwards he in his stead did raigne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But shortly was by Coyll in batteill slaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who after long debate, since Lucies tyme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was of the Britons first crownd Soveraine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan this Realme renew her passed prime:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He of his name Coylchester built of stone and lime.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when the Romanes heard, they hither sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Constantius, a man of mickle might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With whome king Coyll made an agreement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to him gave for wife his daughter bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayre Helena, the fairest living wight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who in all godly thewes and goodly praise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did far excell, but was most famous hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For skil in Musicke of all in her daies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As well in curious instruments as cunning laies.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Of whom he did great Constantine begett,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who afterward was Emperour of Rome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which whiles absent he his mind did sett,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oclavius here lept into his roome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And it usurped by unrighteous doome:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he his title justifide by might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Slaying Traherne, and having overcome</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Romane legion in dreadfull fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So settled he his kingdome, and confirmd his right:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But wanting yssew male, his daughter deare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gave in wedlocke to Maximian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him with her made of his kingdome heyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who soone by meanes thereof the Empire wan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till murdred by the freends of Gratian.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan the Hunnes and Picls invade this land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">.During the raigne of Maximinian;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who dying left none heire them to withstand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that they overran all parts with easy hand.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The weary Britons, whose war-hable youth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was by Maximian lately ledd away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With wretched miseryes and woefull ruth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were to those Pagans made an open pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And daily spectacle of sad decay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whome Romane warres, which now fowr hundred yeares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And more had wasted, could no whit dismay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Til, by consent of Commons and of Peares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They crownd the second Constantine with joyous teares.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who having oft in batteill vanquished</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those spoylefull Pi fts, and swarming Easterlings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long time in peace his realme established,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet oft annoyd with sondry bordragings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of neighbour Scots, and forrein Scatterlings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which the world did in those dayes abound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to outbarre, with painefull pyonings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From sea to sea he heapt a mighty mound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which from Alcluid to Panwelt did that border bownd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Three sones he dying left, all under age;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By meanes whereof their uncle Vortigere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Usurpt the crowne during their pupillage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which th' Infants tutors gathering to feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them closely into Armorick did beare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For dread of whom, and for those Picts annoyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He sent to Germany straunge aid to reare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whence eftsoones arrived here three hoyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Saxons, whom he for his safety imployes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Two brethren were their Capitayns, which hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hengist and Horsus, well approv'd in warre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both of them men of renowmed might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who making vantage of their civile Jarre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of those forreyners which came from farre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Grew great, and got large portions of land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in the Realme ere long they stronger arre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then they which sought at first their helping hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Vortiger have forst the kingdome to aband.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But by the helpe of Vortimere his sonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He is againe unto his rule restord;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Hengist, seeming sad for that was donne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Received is to grace and new accord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through his faire daughters face and flattring word.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone after which three hundred Lords he slew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of British blood, all sitting at his bord;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose dolefull moniments who list to rew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th'eternall marks of treason may at Stonheng vew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By this the sonnes of Constantine, which fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ambrose and Uther, did ripe yeares attayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, here arriving, strongly challenged</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The crowne which Vortiger did long detayne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, flying from his guilt, by them was slayne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Hengist eke soon brought to shamefull death.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thenceforth Aurelius peaceably did rayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that through poyson stopped was his breath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So now entombed lies at Stoneheng by the heath.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>After him Uther, which Pendragon hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Succeeding There abruptly it did end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without full point, or other Cesure right;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if the rest some wicked hand did rend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or th'Author selfe could not at least attend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To finish it: that so untimely breach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Prince him selfe halfe seemed to offend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet secret pleasure did offence empeach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wonder of antiquity long stopt his speach.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last, quite ravisht with delight to heare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The royall Ofspring of his native land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cryde out; "Deare countrey! O! how dearely deare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ought thy remembraunce and perpetuall band</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be to thy foster Childe, that from thy hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did commun breath and nouriture receave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How brutish is it not to understand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How much to her we owe, that all us gave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That gave unto us all what ever good we have."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Guyon all this while his booke did read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne yet has ended; for it was a great</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ample volume, that doth far exceed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My leasure so long leaves here to repeat:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It told how first Prometheus did create</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A man, of many parts from beasts deryv'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then stole fire from heven to animate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His worke, for which he was by Jove depryv'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of life him self, and hart-strings of an Aegle ryv'd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That man so made he called Elfe, to weet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quick, the first author of all Elfin kynd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, wandring through the world with wearie feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did in the gardins of Adonis fynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A goodly creature, whom he deemd in mynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be no earthly wight, but either Spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or Angell, th'authour of all woman kynd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore a Fay he her according hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of whom all Faeryes spring, and fetch their lignage right,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Of these a mighty people shortly grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And puissant kinges which all the world warrayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to them selves all Nations did subdew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The first and eldest, which that scepter swayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was Elfin; him all India obayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all that now America men call:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Next him was noble Elfinan, who laid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cleopolis foundation first of all:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Elfiline enclosd it with a golden wall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His sonne was Elfinell, who overcame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wicked Gobbelines in bloody field;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Elfant was of most renowmed fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who all of Christall did Panthea build:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Elfar, who two brethren gyauntes kild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The one of which had two heades, th'other three:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Elfinor, who was in magick skild;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He built by art upon the glassy See</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bridge of bras, whose sound hevens thunder seem'd to bee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He left three sonnes, the which in order raynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all their Ofspring, in their dew descents;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even seven hundred Princes, which maintaynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With mightie deedes their sondry governments;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That were too long their infinite contents</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here to record, ne much materiall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet should they be most famous moniments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And brave ensample, both of martiall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And civil rule, to kinges and states imperiall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>After all these Elficleos did rayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wise Elficleos, in great Majestic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who mightily that scepter did sustayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with rich spoyles and famous victorie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did high advaunce the crowne of Faery:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He left two sonnes, of which faire Elferon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The eldest brother, did untimely dy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose emptie place the mightie Oberon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doubly supplide, in spousall and dominion.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Great was his power and glorie over all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, him before, that sacred seate did fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That yet remaines his wide memoriall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He dying left the fairest Tanaquill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him to succeede therein, by his last will:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fairer and nobler liveth none this howre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne like in grace, ne like in learned skill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore they Glorian call that glorious flowre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long mayst thou, Glorian, live in glory and great powre!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Beguyld thus with delight of novelties,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And naturall desire of countryes state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So long they redd in those antiquities,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That how the time was fled they quite forgate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till gentle Alma, seeing it so late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perforce their studies broke, and them besought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To thinke how supper did them long awaite:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So halfe unwilling from their bookes them brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fayrely feasted as so noble knightes she ought.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-11" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The enimies of Temperaunce</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Besiege her dwelling place:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Prince Arthur them repelles, and fowle</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Maleger doth deface.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>What warre so cruel, or what siege so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As that which strong affections doe apply</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the forte of reason evermore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bring the sowle into captivity?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their force is fiercer through infirmity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the fraile flesh, relenting to their rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And exercise most bitter tyranny</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the partes brought into their bondage:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No wretchednesse is like to sinfull vellenage.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But in a body which doth freely yeeld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His partes to reasons rule obedient,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And letteth her that ought the scepter weeld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All happy peace and goodly government</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is setled there in sure establishment.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There Alma, like a virgin Queene most bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth florish in all beautie excellent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to her guestes doth bounteous banket dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Attempred goodly well for health and for delight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Early, before the Morne with cremosin ray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The windowes of bright heaven opened had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through which into the world the dawning day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might looke, that maketh every creature glad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uprose Sir Guyon, in bright armour clad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to his purposd journey him prepar'd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With him the Palmer eke in habit sad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him selfe addrest to that adventure hard:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So to the rivers syde they both together far'd:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Where them awaited ready at the ford</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Ferriman, as Alma had behight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his well-rigged bote: They goe abord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he eftsoones gan launch his barke forthright.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere long they rowed were quite out of sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fast the land behynd them fled away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But let them pas, whiles wind and wether right</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe serve their turnes: here I a while must stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see a cruell fight doen by the prince this day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For all so soone as Guyon thence was gon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his voyage with his trustie guyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That wicked band of villeins fresh begon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That castle to assaile on every side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lay strong siege about it far and wyde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So huge and infinite their numbers were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the land they under them did hyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So fowle and ugly, that exceeding feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their visages imprest when they approched neare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Them in twelve troupes their Captein did dispart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And round about in fittest steades did place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where each might best offend his proper part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his contrary object most deface,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As every one seem'd meetest in that cace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seven of the same against the Castle gate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In strong entrenchments he did closely place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with incessaunt force and endlesse hate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They battred day and night, and entraunce did awate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The other five five sondry wayes he sett</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the five great Bulwarkes of that pyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto each a Bulwarke did arrett,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T'assayle with open force or hidden guyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hope thereof to win victorious spoile.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They all that charge did fervently apply</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With greedie malice and importune toyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And planted there their huge artillery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With which they dayly made most dreadfull battery.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The first troupe was a monstrous rablement</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of fowle misshapen wightes, of which some were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Headed like Owles, with beckes uncomely bent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Others like Dogs; others like Gryphons dreare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And some had wings, and some had clawes to teare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every one of them had Lynces eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every one did bow and arrowes beare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All those were lawlesse lustes, currupt envyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And covetous aspects, all cruell enimyes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Those same against the bulwarke of the Sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did lay strong siege and battailous assault,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne once did yield it respitt day nor night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But soone as Titan gan his head exault,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soone againe as he his light withhault,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their wicked engins they against it bent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is, each thing by which the eyes may fault:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But two then all more huge and violent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beautie and Money, they that Bulwarke sorely rent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The second Bulwarke was the Hearing sence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst which the second troupe assignment makes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deformed creatures, in straunge difference,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some having heads like Harts, some like to Snakes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some like wilde Bores late rouzd out of the brakes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Slaunderous reproches, and fowle infamies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Leasinges, backbytinges, and vain-glorious crakes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bad counsels, prayses, and false flatteries:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All those against that fort did bend their batteries.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Likewise that same third Fort, that is the Smell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that third troupe was cruelly assay d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose hideous shapes were like to feendes of hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some like to houndes, some like to Apes, dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some like to Puttockes, all in plumes arayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All shap't according their conditions:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For by those ugly formes weren pourtrayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Foolish delights, and fond abusions,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which doe that sence besiege with light illusions.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And that fourth band which cruell battry bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the fourth Bulwarke, that is the Taste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was, as the rest, a grysie rablement;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some mouth'd like greedy Oystriges; some faste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like loathly Toades; some fashioned in the waste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like swine: for so deformd is luxury,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Surfeat, misdiet, and unthriftie waste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vaine feastes, and ydle superfluity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All those this sences Fort assayle incessantly.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But the fift troupe, most horrible of hew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ferce of force, is dreadfull to report;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For some like Snailes, some did like spyders shew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And some like ugly Urchins thick and short:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cruelly they assayed that fift Fort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Armed with dartes of sensuall Delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With stinges of carnall lust, and strong effort</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of feeling pleasures, with which day and night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against that same fift bulwarke they continued fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus these twelve troupes with dreadfull puissaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against that Castle restlesse siege did lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evermore their hideous Ordinaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the Bulwarkes cruelly did play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That now it gan to threaten neare decay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evermore their wicked Capitayn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Provoked them the breaches to assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes with threats, sometimes with hope of gayn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which by the ransack of that peece they should attayn.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>On th'other syde, th'assieged Castles ward</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their stedfast stonds did mightily maintaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many bold repulse and many hard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Achievement wrought, with perill and with payne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That goodly frame from ruine to sustaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And those two brethren Gyauntes did defend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The walles so stoutly with their sturdie mayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That never entraunce any durst pretend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But they to direfull death their groning ghosts did send.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The noble Virgin, Ladie of the Place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was much dismayed with that dreadful sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For never was she in so evill cace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that the Prince, seeing her wofull plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan her recomfort from so sad affright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Offring his service, and his dearest life</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For her defence against that Carle to fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which was their chiefe and th'authour of that strife:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She him remercied as the Patrone of her life.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones himselfe in glitterand armes he dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his well proved weapons to him hent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So, taking courteous conge, he behight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those gates to be unbar'd, and forth he went.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayre mote he thee, the prowest and most gent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ever brandished bright steele on hye!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whome soone as that unruly rablement</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his gay Squyre issewing did espye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They reard a most outrageous dreadfull yelling cry</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And therewithall attonce at him let fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their fluttring arrowes, thicke as flakes of snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And round about him flocke impetuously,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like a great water flood, that tombling low</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fom the high mountaines, threates to overflow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With suddein fury all the fertile playne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the sad husbandmans long hope doth throw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adowne the streame, and all his vowes make vayne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor bounds nor banks his headlong ruine may sustayne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Upon his shield their heaped hayle he bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his sword disperst the raskall flockes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which fled asonder, and him fell before;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As withered leaves drop from their dryed stockes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When the wroth Western wind does reave their locks</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And underneath him his courageous steed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fierce Spumador, trode them downe like docks;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fierce Spumador, borne of heavenly seed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as Laomedon of Phoebus race did breed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which suddeine horrour and confused cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When as their Capteine heard, in haste he yode</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cause to weet, and fault to remedy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a Tygre swift and fierce he rode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That as the winde ran underneath his lode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles his long legs nigh raught unto the ground.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full large he was of limbe, and shoulders brode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But of such subtile substance and unsound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That like a ghost he seem'd whose grave-clothes were unbound;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And in his hand a bended bow was scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many arrowes under his right side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All deadly daungerous, all cruell keene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Headed with flint, and fethers bloody dide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as the Indians in their quivers hide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those could he well direct and streight as line,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bid them strike the marke which he had eyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne was there salve, ne was there medicine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That mote recure their wounds; so inly they did tine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As pale and wan as ashes was his looke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His body leane and meagre as a rake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And skin all withered like a dryed rooke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereto as cold and drery as a snake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemd to tremble evermore and quake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All in a canvas thin he was bedight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And girded with a belt of twisted brake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his head he wore an Helmet light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made of a dead mans skull, that seemd a ghastly sight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Maleger was his name; and after him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There folio w'd fast at hand two wicked Hags,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hoary lockes all loose, and visage grim;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their feet unshod, their bodies wrapt in rags,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both as swift on foot as chased Stags;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet the one her other legge had lame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with a staffe, all full of litle snags,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She did support, and Impotence her name:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But th'other was Impatience, arm'd with raging flame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as the Carle from far the Prince espyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Glistring in armes and warlike ornament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His Beast he felly prickt on either syde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his mischievous bow full readie bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which at him a cruell shaft he sent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he was warie, and it warded well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his shield, that it no further went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to the ground the idle quarrell fell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he another and another did expell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which to prevent the Prince his mortall speare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone to him raught, and fierce at him did ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be avenged of that shot whyleare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he was not so hardy to abide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That bitter stownd, but turning quicke aside</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His light-foot beast, fled fast away for feare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom to poursue the Infant after hide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So fast as his good Courser could him beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But labour lost it was to weene approch him neare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For as the winged wind his Tigre fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That vew of eye could scarse him overtake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne scarse his feet on ground were scene to tred:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through hils and dales he speedy way did make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne hedge ne ditch his readie passage brake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his flight the villein turn'd his face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(As wonts the Tartar by the Caspian lake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whenas the Russian him in fight does chace)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto his Tygres taile, and shot at him apace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Apace he shot, and yet he fled apace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still as the greedy knight nigh to him drew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oftentimes he would relent his pace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That him his foe more fiercely should poursew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when his uncouth manner he did vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan avize to follow him no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But keepe his standing, and his shaftes eschew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill he quite had spent his perlous store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then assayle him fresh, ere he could shift for more.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But that lame Hag, still as abroad he strew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His wicked arrowes, gathered them againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to him brought, fresh batteill to renew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he espying cast her to restraine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From yielding succour to that cursed Swaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her attaching thought her hands to tye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But soone as him dismounted on the plaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That other Hag did far away espye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Binding her sister, she to him ran hastily;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And catching hold of him, as downe he lent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him backeward overthrew, and downe him stayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With their rude handes and gryesly graplement;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that the villein, comming to their ayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon him fell, and lode upon him layd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full litle wanted but he had him slaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of the battell balefull end had made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had not his gentle Squire beheld his paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And commen to his reskew, ere his bitter bane.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So greatest and most glorious thing on ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May often need the helpe of weaker hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So feeble is mans state, and life unsound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in assuraunce it may never stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till it dissolved be from earthly band.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proofe be thou, Prince, the prowest man alyve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And noblest borne of all in Britayne land;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet thee fierce Fortune did so nearely drive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, had not grace thee blest, thou shouldest not survive.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Squyre arriving fiercely in his armes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Snatcht first the one, and then the other Jade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His chiefest letts and authors of his harmes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And them perforce withheld with threatned blade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least that his Lord they should behinde invade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles the Prince, prickt with reprochful shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one awakte out of long slombring shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Revivyng thought of glory and of fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>United all his powres to purge him selfe from blame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like as a fire, the which in hollow cave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath long bene underkept and down supprest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With murmurous disdayne doth inly rave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And grudge in so streight prison to be prest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last breakes forth with furious unrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strives to mount unto his native seat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All that did earst it hinder and molest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yt now devoures with flames and scorching heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And carries into smoake with rage and horror great.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So mightely the Briton Prince him rouzd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of his holde, and broke his caytive bands;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as a Beare, whom angry curres have touzd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having off-shakt them and escapt their hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Becomes more fell, and all that him withstands</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Treads down and overthrowes. Now had the Carle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alighted from his Tigre, and his hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Discharged of his bow and deadly quar'le,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To seize upon his foe flatt lying on the marie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which now him turnd to disavantage deare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For neither can he fly, nor other harme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But trust unto his strength and manhood meare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith now he is far from his monstrous swarme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of his weapons did himselfe disarme.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The knight, yet wrothfull for his late disgrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fiercely advaunst his valorous right arme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him so sore smott with his yron mace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That groveling to the ground he fell, and fild his place.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Wei weened hee that field was then his owne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all his labor brought to happy end;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When suddein up the villeine overthrowne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of his swowne arose, fresh to contend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gan him selfe to second battaill bend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As hurt he had not beene. Thereby there lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An huge great stone, which stood upon one end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And had not bene removed many a day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some land-marke seemd to bee, or signe of sundry way</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The same he snatcht, and with exceeding sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Threw at his foe, who was right well aware</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To shonne the engm of his meant decay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It booted not to thinke that throw to beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But grownd he gave, and lightly lept areare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eft fierce retourning, as a faulcon fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That once hath failed of her souse full neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Remounts againe into the open ayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And unto better fortune doth her selfe prepayre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So brave retourning, with his brandisht blade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He to the Carle him selfe agayn addrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strooke at him so sternely, that he made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An open passage through his riven brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That halfe the steele behind his backe did rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which drawing backe, he looked evermore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When the hart blood should gush out of his chest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or his dead corse should fall upon the flore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But his dead corse upon the flore fell nathemore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne drop of blood appeared shed to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All were the wownd so wide and wonderous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That through his carcas one might playnly see.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Halfe in amaze with horror hideous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And halfe in rage to be deluded thus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Again through both the sides he strooke him quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That made his spright to grone full piteous;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet nathemore forth fled his groning spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But freshly, as at first, prepard himselfe to fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereat he smitten was with great affright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And trembling terror did his hart apall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne wist he what to thinke of that same sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne what to say, ne what to doe at all:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He doubted least it were some magicall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Illusion that did beguile his sense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or wandring ghost that wanted funerall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or aery spirite under false pretence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or hellish feend raysd up through divelish science.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His wonder far exceeded reasons reach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he began to doubt his dazeled sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oft of error did himselfe appeach:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flesh without blood, a person without spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wounds without hurt, a body without might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That could doe harme, yet could not harmed bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That could not die, yet seemd a mortall wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was most strong in most infirmitee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like did he never heare, like did he never see.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Awhile he stood in this astonishment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet would he not for all his great dismay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Give over to effect his first intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And th'utmost meanes of victory assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or th'utmost yssew of his owne decay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His owne good sword Mordure, that never fayld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At need till now, he lightly threw away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his bright shield that nought him now avayld;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with his naked hands him forcibly assayld.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Twixt his two mighty armes him up he snatcht,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And crusht his carcas so against his brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the disdainfull sowle he thence dispatcht,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And th'ydle breath all utterly exprest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, when he felt him dead, adowne he kest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The lumpish corse unto the sencelesse grownd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adowne he kest it with so puissant wrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That backe againe it did alofte rebownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gave against his mother earth a gronefull sownd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when Joves harnesse-bearing Bird from hye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stoupes at a flying heron with proud disdayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The stone-dead quarrey falls so forciblye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That yt rebownds against the lowly playne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A second fall redoubling backe agayne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then thought the Prince all peril sure was past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that he victor onely did remayne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No sooner thought, then that the Carle as fast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gan heap huge strokes on him, as ere he down was cast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nigh his wits end then woxe th'amazed knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thought his labor lost, and travell vayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against this lifelesse shadow so to fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet life he saw, and felt his mighty mayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, whiles he marveild still, did still him payne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forthy he gan some other wayes advize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How to take life from that dead-living swayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom still he marked freshly to arize</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From th'earth, and from her womb new spirits to reprize.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He then remembred well, that had bene sayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How th' Earth his mother was, and first him bore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She eke, so often as his life decayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did life with usury to him restore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And reysd him up much stronger then before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So soone as he unto her wombe did fall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore to grownd he would him cast no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne him committ to grave terrestriall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But beare him farre from hope of succour usuall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho up he caught him twixt his puissant hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And having scruzd out of his carrion corse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The lothfull life, now loosd from sinfull bands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his shoulders carried him perforse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above three furlongs, taking his full course</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until he came unto a standing lake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him thereinto he threw without remorse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne stird, till hope of life did him forsake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So end of that Carles dayes and his owne paynes did make.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when those wicked Hags from far did spye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like two mad dogs they ran about the lands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And th'one of them with dreadfull yelling crye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throwing away her broken chaines and bands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And having quencht her burning fier-brands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hedlong her selfe did cast into that lake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Impotence with her owne wilfull hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One of Malegers cursed darts did take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So ryv'd her trembling hart, and wicked end did make.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus now alone he conquerour remaines:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, cumming to his Squyre that kept his steed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thought to have mounted; but his feeble vaines</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him faild thereto, and served not his need,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through losse of blood which from his wounds did bleed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he began to faint, and life decay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But his good Squyre, him helping up with speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With stedfast hand upon his horse did stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And led him to the Castle by the beaten way.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Where many Groomes and Squyres ready were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To take him from his steed full tenderly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the fayrest Alma mett him there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With balme, and wine, and costly spicery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To comfort him in his infirmity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftesoones shee causd him up to be convayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of his armes despoyled easily</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In sumptuous bed shee made him to be layd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And al the while his wounds were dressing by him stayd.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-12" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Guyon, by Palmers governaunce,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Passing through perils great,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Doth overthrow the Bowre of blisse,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And Acrasie defeat.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now ginnes that goodly frame of Temperaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayrely to rise, and her adorned hed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To pricke of highest prayse forth to advaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Formerly grounded and fast setteled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On firme foundation of true bountyhed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And this brave knight, that for this vertue fightes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now comes to point of that same perilous sted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where Pleasure dwelles in sensuall delights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mongst thousand dangers, and ten thousand Magick mights.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Two dayes now in that sea he sayled has,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever land beheld, ne living wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought save perill still as he did pas:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, when appeared the third Morrow bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the waves to spred her trembling light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An hideous roring far away they heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all their sences filled with affright;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And streight they saw the raging surges reard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up to the skyes, that them of drowning made affeard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Said then the Boteman, "Palmer, stere aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And keepe an even course; for yonder way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We needes must pas (God doe us well acquight!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is the Gulfe of Greedinesse, theysay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That deepe engorgeth all this worldes pray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which having swallowd up excessively,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He soone in vomit up againe doth lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And belcheth forth his superfluity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all the seas for feare doe seeme away to fly.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"On thother syde an hideous Rocke is pight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of mightie Magnes stone, whose craggie clift</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Depending from on high, dreadfull to sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over the waves his rugged armes doth lift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And threatneth downe to throw his ragged rift</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On whoso cometh nigh; yet nigh it drawes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All passengers, that none from it can shift:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, whiles they fly that Gulfes devouring jawes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They on this rock are rent, and sunck in helples wawes."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Forward they passe, and strongly he them rowes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill they nigh unto that Gulfe arryve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where streame more violent and greedy growes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then he with all his puisaunce doth stryve</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To strike his oares, and mightily doth drive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hollow vessell through the threatfull wave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, gaping wide to swallow them alyve</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In th' huge abysse of his engulfing grave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth rore at them in vaine, and with great terrour rave.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They, passing by, that grisely mouth did see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sucking the seas into his entralles deepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemd more horrible then hell to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that darke dreadfull hole of Tartare steepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through which the damned ghosts doen often creepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Backe to the world, bad livers to torment:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But nought that falles into this direfull deepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne that approcheth nigh the wyde descent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May backe retourne, but is condemned to be drent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>On thother side they saw that perilous Rocke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Threatning it selfe on them to ruinate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On whose sharp cliftes the ribs of vessels broke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shivered ships, which had beene wrecked late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet stuck with carkases exanimate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of such, as having all their substance spent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In wanton joyes and lustes intemperate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did afterwards make shipwrack violent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both of their life and fame, for ever fowly blent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Forthy this hight The Rocke of vile Reproch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A daungerous and detestable place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which nor fish nor fowle did once approch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yelling Meawes, with Seagulles hoars and bace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Cormoyraunts, with birds of ravenous race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which still sat waiting on that wastfull clift</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For spoile of wretches, whose unhappy cace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After lost credit and consumed thrift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last them driven hath to this despairefull drift.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Palmer, seeing them in safetie past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus saidc; "Behold th'ensamples in our sights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of lustfull luxurie and thriftlesse wast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What now is left of miserable wightes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which spent their looser daies in leud delightes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But shame and sad reproch, here to be red</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By these rent reliques, speaking their ill plightes?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let all that live hereby be counselled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To shunne Rocke of Reproch, and it as death to dred!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So forth they rowed; and that Ferryman</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his stiffe oares did brush the sea so strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the hoare waters from his frigot ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the light bubles daunced all along,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles the salt brine out of the billowes sprong.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last fer off they many Islandes spy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On every side floting the floodes emong:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then said the knight; "Lo! I the land descry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore, old Syre, thy course doe thereunto apply."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"That may not bee," said then the Ferryman,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Least wee unweeting hap to be fordonne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For those same Islands, seeming now and than,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are not firme land, nor any certein wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But stragling plots which to and fro doe ronne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the wide waters: therefore are they hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Wandring Islands. Therefore doe them shonne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For they have ofte drawne many a wandring wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into most deadly daunger and distressed plight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Yet well they seeme to him, that farre doth vew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both faire and fruitfull, and the grownd dispred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With grassy greene of delectable hew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the tall trees with leaves appareled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are deckt with blossoms dyde in white and red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That mote the passengers thereto allure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But whosoever once hath fastened</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His foot thereon, may never it recure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But wandreth evermore uncertein and unsure.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"As th' Isle of Delos whylome, men report,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amid th'Aegaean sea long time did stray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne made for shipping any certeine port,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that Latona traveiling that way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flying from Junoes wrath and hard assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her fayre twins was there delivered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which afterwards did rule the night and day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thenceforth it firmely was established,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for Apolloes temple highly berried."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They to him hearken, as beseemeth meete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And passe on forward: so their way does ly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That one of those same Islands, which doe fleet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the wide sea, they needes must passen by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which seemd so sweet and pleasaunt to the eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it would tempt a man to touchen there:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the banck they sitting did espy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A daintie damsell dressing of her heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By whom a little skippet floting did appeare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She, them espying, loud to them can call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bidding them nigher draw unto the shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she had cause to busie them withall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therewith lowdly laught: But nathemore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would they once turne, but kept on as afore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when she saw, she left her lockes undight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And running to her boat withouten ore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the departing land it launched light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after them did drive with all her power and might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom overtaking, she in merry sort</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them gan to bord, and purpose diversly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now faining dalliaunce and wanton sport,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now throwing forth lewd wordes immodestly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that the Palmer gan full bitterly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her to rebuke for being loose and light:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which not abiding, but more scornfully</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Scoffing at him that did her justly wite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She turnd her bote about, and from them rowed quite.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That was the wanton Phaedria, which late</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did ferry him over the Idle lake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom nought regarding they kept on their gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all her vaine allurements did forsake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When them the wary Boteman thus bespake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Here now behoveth us well to avyse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of our safety good heede to take;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For here before a perlous passage lyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where many Mermayds haunt making false melodies:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But by the way there is a great Quicksand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And a whirlepoole of hidden jeopardy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore, Sir Palmer, keepe an even hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For twixt them both the narrow way doth ly."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Scarse had he saide, when hard at hand they spy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That quicksand nigh with water covered;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by the checked wave they did descry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It plaine, and by the sea discoloured:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It called was the quickesand of Unthriftyhed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They, passing by, a goodly Ship did see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Laden from far with precious merchandize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bravely furnished as ship might bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which through great disaventure, or mesprize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her selfe had ronne into that hazardize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose mariners and merchants with much toyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Labour'd in vaine to have recur'd their prize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the rich wares to save from pitteous spoyle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But neither toyle nor traveill might her backe recoyle.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>On th'other side they see that perilous Poole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That called was the Whirlepoole of decay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which full many had with haplesse doole</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beene suncke, of whom no memorie did stay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose circled waters rapt with whirling sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to a restlesse wheele, still ronning round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did covet, as they passed by that way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To draw their bote within the utmost bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his wide Labyrinth, and then to have them dround.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But th' heedful Boteman strongly forth did stretch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His brawnie armes, and all his bodie straine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That th'utmost sandy breach they shortly fetch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles the dredd daunger does behind remaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Suddeine they see from midst of all the Maine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The surging waters like a mountaine rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the great sea, puft up with proud disdaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To swell above the measure of his guise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As threatning to devoure all that his powre despise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The waves come rolling, and the billowes rore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Outragiously, as they enraged were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or wrathfull Neptune did them drive before</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His whirling charet for exceeding feare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For not one puffe of winde there did appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the three thereat woxe much afrayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unweeting what such horrour straunge did reare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones they saw an hideous hoast arrayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of huge Sea monsters, such as living sence dismayd:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Most ugly shapes and horrible aspects,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as Dame Nature selfe mote feare to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or shame that ever should so fowle defects</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From her most cunning hand escaped bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All dreadfull pourtraicts of deformitee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spring-headed Hydres; and sea-shouldring Whales;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great whirlpooles which all fishes make to flee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bright Scolopendraes arm'd with silver scales;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mighty Monoceroses with immeasured tayles.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The dreadful Fish that hath deserv'd the name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Death, and like him lookes in dreadfull hew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The griesly Wasserman, that makes his game</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The flying ships with swiftnes to pursew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The horrible Sea-satyre, that doth shew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His fearefull face in time of greatest storme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Huge Ziffius, whom Mariners eschew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No lesse then rockes, (as travellers informe)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And greedy Rosmarines with visages deforme.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All these, and thousand thousands many more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And more deformed Monsters thousand fold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With dreadfull noise and hollow rombling rore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came rushing, in the fomy waves enrold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which seem'd to fly for feare them to behold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne wonder, if these did the knight appall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all that here on earth we dreadfull hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be but as bugs to fearen babes withall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Compared to the creatures in the seas entrall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Feare nought," then saide the Palmer well aviz'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"For these same Monsters are not these in deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But are into these fearefull shapes disguiz'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By that same wicked witch, to worke us dreed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And draw from on this journey to proceed."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho lifting up his vertuous staffe on hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He smote the sea, which calmed was with speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all that dreadfull Armie fast gan flye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into great Tethys bosome, where they hidden lye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Quit from that danger forth their course they kept;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as they went they heard a ruefull cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of one that wayld and pittifully wept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That through the sea resounding plaints did fly:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last they in an Island did espy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A seemely Maiden sitting by the shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with great sorrow and sad agony</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seemed some great misfortune to deplore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lowd to them for succour called evermore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which Guyon hearing streight his Palmer bad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To stere the bote towards that dolefull Mayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he might know and ease her sorrow sad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, him avizing better, to him sayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Faire Sir, be not displeasd if disobayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ill it were to hearken to her cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she is inly nothing ill apayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But onely womanish fine forgery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your stubborne hart t' affect with fraile infirmity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"To which when she your courage hath inclind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through foolish pitty, then her guilefull bayt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She will embosome deeper in your mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for your ruine at the last awayt."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Knight was ruled, and the Boteman strayt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Held on his course with stayed stedfastnesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever shroncke, ne ever sought to bayt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His tyred armes for toylesome wearinesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But with his oares did sweepe the watry wildernesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now they nigh approched to the sted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereas those Mermayds dwelt: it was a still</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And calmy bay, on th'one side sheltered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the brode shadow of an hoarie hill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On th'other side an high rocke toured still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That twixt them both a pleasaunt port they made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did like an halfe Theatre fulfill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There those five sisters had continuall trade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And usd to bath themselves in that deceiptfull shade.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They were faire Ladies, till they fondly striv'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With th' Heliconian maides for maystery;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whom they, over-comen, were depriv'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of their proud beautie, and th'one moyity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Transformd to fish for their bold surquedry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But th'upper halfe their hew retayned still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And their sweet skill in wonted melody;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which ever after they abusd to ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>T'allure weake traveillers, whom gotten they did kill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So now to Guyon, as he passed by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their pleasaunt tunes they sweetly thus applyde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"O thou fayre sonne of gentle Faery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That art in mightie armes most magnifyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above all knights that ever batteill tryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O! turne thy rudder hitherward awhile:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here may thy storme-bett vessell safely ryde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This is the Port of rest from troublous toyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The worldes sweet In from paine and wearisome turmoyle."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that the rolling sea, resounding soft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his big base them fitly answered;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on the rocke the waves breaking aloft</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A solemne Meane unto them measured;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles sweet Zephyrus lowd whisteled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His treble, a straunge kinde of harmony,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Guyons senses softly tickeled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he the boteman bad row easily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let him heare some part of their rare melody.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But him the Palmer from that vanity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With temperate advice discounselled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they it past, and shortly gan descry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The land to which their course they leveled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When suddeinly a grosse fog over-spred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his dull vapour all that desert has,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heavens chearefull face enveloped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all things one, and one as nothing was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this great Universe seemd one confused mas.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereat they greatly were dismayd, ne wist</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How to direct theyr way in darkenes wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But feard to wander in that wastefull mist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For tombling into mischiefe unespide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Worse is the daunger hidden then descride.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Suddeinly an innumerable flight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of harmefull fowles about them fluttering cride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with their wicked wings them ofte did smight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sore annoyed, groping in that griesly night.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Even all the nation of unfortunate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fatall birds about them flocked were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as by nature men abhorre and hate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The ill-faste Owle, deaths dreadfull messengere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hoars Night-raven, trump of dolefull drere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The lether-winged Batt, dayes enimy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The ruefull Strich, still waiting on the here;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whistler shrill, that whoso heares doth dy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hellish Harpyes, prophets of sad destiny.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All those, and all that els does horror breed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About them flew, and fild their sayles with feare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet stayd they not, but forward did proceed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles th'one did row, and th'other stifly steare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that at last the weather gan to cleare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the faire land it selfe did playnly sheow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said then the Palmer; "Lo! where does appeare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sacred soile where all our perills grow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therfore, Sir knight, your ready arms about you throw."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He hearkned, and his armes about him tooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles the nimble bote so well her sped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with her crooked keele the land she strooke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then forth the noble Guyon sallied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his sage Palmer that him governed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But th'other by his bote behind did stay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They marched fayrly forth, of nought ydred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both firmely armd for every hard assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With constancy and care, gainst daunger and dismay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ere long they heard an hideous bellowing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of many beasts, that roard outrageously,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if that hungers poynt or Venus sting</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had them enraged with fell surquedry:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet nought they feard, but past on hardily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill they came in vew of those wilde beasts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who all attonce, gaping full greedily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rearing fercely their upstaring crests,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ran towards to devoure those unexpected guests.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But soone as they approcht with deadly threat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Palmer over them his staffe upheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mighty staffe, that could all charmes defeat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftesoones their stubborne corages were queld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And high advaunced crests downe meekely feld;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Instead of fraying, they them selves did feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And trembled as them passing they beheld:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such wondrous powre did in that staffe appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All monsters to subdew to him that did it beare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Of that same wood it fram'd was cunningly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which Caduceus whilome was made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Caduceus, the rod of Mercury,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which he wonts the Stygian realmes invade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through ghastly horror and eternall shade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th'infernall feends with it he can asswage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Orcus tame, whome nothing can persuade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rule the Furyes when they most doe rage.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such vertue in his staffe had eke this Palmer sage.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thence passing forth, they shortly doe arryve</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereas the Bowre of Blisse was situate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A place pickt out by choyce of best alyve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That natures worke by art can imitate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which whatever in this worldly state</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is sweete and pleasing unto living sense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that may dayntest fantasy aggrate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was poured forth with plentifull dispence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made there to abound with lavish affluence.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Goodly it was enclosed rownd about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As well their entred guestes to keep within,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As those unruly beasts to hold without;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was the fence thereof but weake and thin:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nought feard theyr force that fortilage to win,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wisedomes powre, and temperaunces might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which the mightiest things efforced bin:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the gate was wrought of substaunce light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rather for pleasure then for battery or fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yt framed was of precious yvory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemd a worke of admirable witt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therein all the famous history</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Jason and Medasa was ywritt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her mighty charmes, her furious loving fitt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His goodly conquest of the golden fleece,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His raised fayth, and love too lightly flitt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wondred Argo, which in venturous peece</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First through the Euxine seas bore all the flowr of Greece.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ye might have scene the frothy billowes fry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under the ship as thorough them she went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemd the waves were into yvory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or yvory into the waves were sent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And otherwhere the snowy substaunce sprent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With vermeil, like the boyes blood therein shed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A piteous speclacle did represent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And otherwhiles, with gold besprinkeled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yt seemd thenchaunted flame which did Creusa wed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All this and more might in that goodly gate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be red, that ever open stood to all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which thither came; but in the Porch there sate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A comely personage of stature tall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And semblaunce pleasing, more then naturall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That traveilers to him seemd to entize:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His looser garment to the ground did fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And flew about his heeles in wanton wize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not fitt for speedy pace, or manly exercize.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They in that place him Genius did call:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not that celestiall powre, to whom the care</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of life, and generation of all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That lives, perteines in charge particulare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who wondrous things concerning our welfare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And straunge phantomes doth lett us ofte foresee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ofte of secret ill bids us beware:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is our Selfe, whom though we do not see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet each doth in him selfe it well perceive to bee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therefore a God him sage Antiquity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did wisely make, and good Agdistes call;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But this same was to that quite contrary,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The foe of life, that good envyes to all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That secretly doth us procure to fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through guilefull semblants which he makes us see:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He of this Gardin had the governall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Pleasures porter was devizd to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Holding a staffe in hand for mere formalitee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With diverse flowres he daintily was deckt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strowed rownd about; and by his side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A mighty Mazer bowle of wine was sett,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if it had to him bene sacrifide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith all new-come guests he gratyfide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So did he eke Sir Guyon passing by;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he his ydle curtesie defide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And overthrew his bowle disdainfully,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And broke his staffe with which he charmed semblants sly.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus being entred, they behold arownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A large and spacious plaine, on every side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strowed with pleasauns; whose fayre grassy grownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mantled with greene, and goodly beautifide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all the ornaments of Floraes pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith her mother Art, as halfe in scorne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of niggard Nature, like a pompous bride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did decke her, and too lavishly adorne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When forth from virgin bowre she comes in th'early morne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith the Heavens alwayes joviall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lookte on them lovely, still in stedfast state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne suffred storme nor frost on them to fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their tender buds or leaves to violate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor scorching heat, nor cold intemperate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T'afflict the creatures which therein did dwell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the milde ayre with season moderate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gently attempred, and disposd so well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That still it breathed forth sweet spirit and holesom smell</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>More sweet and holesome then the pleasaunt hill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Rhodope, on which the Nimphe that bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A gyaunt babe herselfe for griefe did kill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or the Thessalian Tempe, where of yore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayre Daphne Phoebus hart with love did gqre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or Ida, where the Gods lov'd to repayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When ever they their heavenly bowres forlore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or sweet Parnasse, the haunt of Muses fayre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or Eden selfe, if ought with Eden mote compayre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Much wondred Guyon at the fayre aspect</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that sweet place, yet suffred no delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sincke into his sence, nor mind affect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But passed forth, and lookt still forward right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Brydling his will and maystering his might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that he came unto another gate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No gate, but like one, being goodly dight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With bowes and braunches, which did broad dilate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their clasping armes in wanton wreathings intricate:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So fashioned a Porch with rare device,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Archt over head with an embracing vine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose bounches hanging downe seemd to entice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All passers by to taste their lushious wine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did them selves into their hands incline,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As freely offering to be gathered;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some deepe empurpled as the Hyacine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some as the Rubine laughing sweetely red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some like faire Emeraudes, not yet well ripened.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And them amongst some were of burnisht gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So made by art to beautify the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which did themselves emongst the leaves enfold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As lurking from the vew of covetous guest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the weake boughes, with so rich load opprest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did bow adowne as overburdened.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under that Porch a comely dame did rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Clad in fayre weedes but fowle disordered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And garments loose that seemd unmeet for womanhed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In her left hand a Cup of gold she held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with her right the riper fruit did reach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose sappy liquor, that with fulnesse sweld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into her cup she scruzd with daintie breach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her fine fingers, without fowle empeach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That so faire winepresse made the wine more sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereof she usd to give to drinke to each,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom passing by she happened to meet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was her guise all Straungers goodly so to greet.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So she to Guyon offred it to tast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, taking it out of her tender hond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cup to ground did violently cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all in peeces it was broken fond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with the liquor stained all the lond:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat Excesse exceedingly was wroth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet no'te the same amend, ne yet withstond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But suffered him to passe, all were she loth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, nought regarding her displeasure, forward goth.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There the most daintie Paradise on ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It selfe doth offer to his sober eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which all pleasures plenteously abownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And none does others happinesse envye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The painted flowres, the trees upshooting hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dales for shade, the hilles for breathing space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The trembling groves, the christall running by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, that which all faire workes doth most aggrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The art which all that wrought appeared in no place.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One would have thought, (so cunningly the rude</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And scorned partes were mingled with the fine)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nature had for wantonesse ensude</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Art, and that Art at nature did repine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So striving each th'other to undermine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each did the others worke more beautify;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So differing both in willes agreed in fine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So all agreed, through sweete diversity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Gardin to adorne with all variety.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And in the midst of all a fountaine stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of richest substance that on earth might bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So pure and shiny that the silver flood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through every channell running one might see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most goodly it with curious ymageree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was overwrought, and shapes of naked boyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which some seemd with lively jollitee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To fly about, playing their wanton toyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whylest others did them selves embay in liquid joyes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And over all of purest gold was spred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A trayle of y vie in his native hew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the rich metall was so coloured,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That wight who did not well avis'd it vew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would surely deeme it to bee yvie trew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Low his lascivious armes adown did creepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That themselves dipping in the silver dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their fleecy flowres they fearefully did steepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which drops of Christall seemd for wantones to weep.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Infinit streames continually did well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of this fountaine, sweet and faire to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which into an ample laver fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shortly grew into so great quantitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That like a litle lake it seemd to bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose depth exceeded not three cubits hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That through the waves one might the bottom see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All pav'd beneath with Jaspar shining bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That seemd the fountaine in that sea did sayle upright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And all the margent round about was sett</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With shady Laurell trees, thence to defend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sunny beames which on the billowes bett,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And those which therein bathed mote offend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Guyon hapned by the same to wend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two naked Damzelles he therein espyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which therein bathing seemed to contend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wrestle wantonly, ne car'd to hyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their dainty partes from vew of any which them eyd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sometimes the one would lift the other quight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above the waters, and then downe againe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her plong, as over-maystered by might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where both awhile would covered remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And each the other from to rise restraine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles their snowy limbes, as through a vele,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So through the christall waves appeared plaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then suddeinly both would themselves unhele,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And th'amarous sweet spoiles to greedy eyes revele.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As that faire Starre, the messenger of morne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His deawy face out of the sea doth reare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or as the Cyprian goddesse, newly borne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of th'Ocean's fruitfull froth, did first appeare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such seemed they, and so their yellow heare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Christalline humor dropped downe apace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom such when Guyon saw, he drew him neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And somewhat gan relent his earnest pace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His stubborne brest gan secret pleasaunce to embrace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The wanton Maidens, him espying, stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gazing awhile at his unwonted guise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then th'one her selfe low ducked in the flood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abasht that her a straunger did avise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But thother rather higher did arise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her two lilly paps aloft displayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all that might his melting hart entyse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To her delights she unto him bewrayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rest hidd underneath him more desirous made.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that the other likewise up arose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her faire lockes, which formerly were bown'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Up in one knott, she low adowne did lose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which flowing low and thick her cloth'd arownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And th'yvorie in golden mantle gownd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that faire spectacle from him was reft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet that which reft it no lesse faire was fownd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So hidd in lockes and waves from lookers theft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nought but her lovely face she for his looking left.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Withall she laughed, and she blusht withall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That blushing to her laughter gave more grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And laughter to her blushing, as did fall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now when they spyde the knight to slacke his pace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them to behold, and in his sparkling face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The secrete signes of kindled lust appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their wanton meriments they did encreace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to him beckned to approch more neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shewd him many sights that corage cold could reare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>On which when gazing him the Palmer saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He much rebukt those wandring eyes of his,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And counseld well him forward thence did draw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now are they come nigh to the Bowre of blis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her fond favorites so nam'd amis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When thus the Palmer: "Now, Sir, well avise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For here the end of all our traveill is:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here wonnes Acrasia, whom we must surprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Els she will slip away, and all our drift despise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones they heard a most melodious sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all that mote delight a daintie eare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as attonce might not on living ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save in this Paradise, be heard elsewhere:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right hard it was for wight which did it heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To read what manner musicke that mote bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all that pleasing is to living eare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was there consorted in one harmonee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Birdes, voices, instruments, windes, waters, all agree</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The joyous birdes, shrouded in chearefull shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their notes unto the voice attempred sweet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th'Angelicall soft trembling voyces made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To th'instruments divine respondence meet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The silver sounding instruments did meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the base murmure of the waters fall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The waters fall with difference discreet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now soft, now loud, unto the wind did call;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gentle warbling wind low answered to all.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There, whence that Musick seemed heard to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was the faire Witch her selfe now solacing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a new Lover, whom, through sorceree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And witchcraft, she from farre did thither bring:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There she had him now laid aslombering</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In secret shade after long wanton joyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilst round about them pleasauntly did sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Many faire Ladies and lascivious boyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ever mixt their song with light licentious toyes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And all that while right over him she hong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With her false eyes fast fixed in his sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As seeking medicine whence she was stong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or greedily depasturing delight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oft inclining downe, with kisses light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For feare of waking him, his lips bedewd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through his humid eyes did sucke his spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quite molten into lust and pleasure lewd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherewith she sighed soft, as if his case she rewd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The whiles some one did chaunt this lovely lay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah! see, whoso fayre thing doest faine to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In springing flowre the image of thy day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah! see the Virgin Rose, how sweetly shee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth first peepe foorth with bashfull modestee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That fairer seemes the lesse ye see her may.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lo! see soone after how more bold and free</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her bared bosome she doth broad display;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo! see soone after how she fades and falls away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So passeth, in the passing of a day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of mortall life the leafe, the bud, the flowre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne more doth florish after first decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That earst was sought to deck both bed and bowre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of many a lady', and many a Paramowre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gather therefore the Rose whilest yet is prime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For soone comes age that will her pride deflowre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gather the Rose of love whilest yet is time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whilest loving thou mayst loved be with equall crime.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He ceast; and then gan all the quire of birdes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their diverse notes t'attune unto his lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As in approvaunce of his pleasing wordes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The constant payre heard all that he did say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet swarved not, but kept their forward way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through many covert groves and thickets close,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which they creeping did at last display</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That wanton Lady with her lover lose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose sleepie head she in her lap did soft dispose.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Upon a bed of Roses she was layd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As faint through heat, or dight to pleasant sin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And was arayd, or rather disarayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All in a vele of silke and silver thin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hid no whit her alablaster skin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But rather shewd more white, if more might bee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More subtile web Arachne cannot spin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor the fine nets, which oft we woven sec</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of scorched deaw, do not in th'ayre more lightly flee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her snowy brest was bare to ready spoyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of hungry eies, which n'ote therewith be fild;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet, through languour of her late sweet toyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Few drops, more cleare then Nectar, forth distild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That like pure Orient perles adowne it trild;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her faire eyes, sweet smyling in delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Moystened their fierie beames, with which she thrild</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fraile harts, yet quenched not; like starry light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, sparckling on the silent waves, does seeme more bright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The young man, sleeping by her, seemd to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some goodly swayne of honorable place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That certes it great pitty was to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him his nobility so fowle deface:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A sweet regard and amiable grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mixed with manly sternesse, did appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet sleeping, in his well proportiond face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on his tender lips the downy heare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did now but freshly spring, and silken blossoms beare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His warlike Armes, the ydle instruments</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of sleeping praise, were hong upon a tree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his crave shield, full of old moniments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was fowly ras't, that none the signes might see:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne for them ne for honour cared hee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought that did to his advauncement tend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in lewd loves, and wastfull luxuree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His dayes, his goods, his bodie, he did spend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O horrible enchantment, that him so did blend!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The noble Elfe and carefull Palmer drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So nigh them, minding nought but lustfull game</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That suddein forth they on them rusht, and threw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A subtile net, which only for that same</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The skilfull Palmer formally did frame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So held them under fast; the whiles the rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fled all away for feare of fowler shame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The faire Enchauntresse, so unwares opprest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tryde all her arts and all her sleights thence out to wrest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And eke her lover strove, but all in vaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that same net so cunningly was wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That neither guile nor force might it distraine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They tooke them both, and both them strongly bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In captive bandes, which there they readie found:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But her in chaines of adamant he tyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For nothing else might keepe her safe and sound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Verdant (so he hight) he soone untyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And counsell sage in steed thereof to him applyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But all those pleasaunt bowres, and Pallace brave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Guyon broke downe with rigour pittilesse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought their goodly workmanship might save</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them from the tempest of his wrathfulnesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that their blisse he turn'd to balefulnesse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their groves he feld; their gardins did deface;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their arbers spoyle; their Cabinets suppresse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their banket houses burne; their buildings race;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, of the fayrest late, now made the fowlest place.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then led they her away, and eke that knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They with them led, both sorrowfull and sad.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The way they came, the same retourn'd they right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till they arrived where they lately had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Charm'd those wild-beasts that rag'd with furie mad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, now awaking, fierce at them gan fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As in their mistresse reskew whom they lad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But them the Palmer soone did pacify.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Guyon askt, what meant those beastes which there did ly?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sayd he; "These seeming beasts are men indeed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom this Enchauntresse hath transformed thus;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whylome her lovers, which her lustes did feed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now turned into figures hideous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">According to their mindes like monstruous."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Sad end," (quoth he) "of life intemperate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mourneful meed of joyes delicious!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, Palmer, if it mote thee so aggrate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let them returned be unto their former state."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Streight way he with his vertuous staffe them strooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And streight of beastes they comely men became;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet being men they did unmanly looke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stared ghastly; some for inward shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And some for wrath to see their captive Dame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But one above the rest in speciall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That had an hog beene late, hight Grylle by name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Repyned greatly, and did him miscall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That had from hoggish forme him brought to naturall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Saide Guyon; "See the mind of beastly man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hath so soone forgot the excellence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his creation, when he life began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That now he chooseth with vile difference</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be a beast, and lacke intelligence!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom the Palmer thus: "The donghill kinde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Delightes in filth and fowle incontinence:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let Gryll be Gryll, and have his hoggish minde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But let us hence depart whilest wether serves and winde."</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="book-3" epub:type="part z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Containing the Legend of Britomartis, or of Chastity</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="book-3-prologue" epub:type="prologue">
				<p>
					<span>It falles me here to write of Chastity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fayrest vertue, far above the rest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which what needes me fetch from Faery</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forreine ensamples it to have exprest?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith it is shrined in my Soveraines brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And formd so lively in each perfect part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to all Ladies, which have it profest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Need but behold the pourtraict of her hart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If pourtrayd it might bee by any living art.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But living art may not least part expresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor life-resembling pencill it can paynt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All were it Zeuxis or Praxiteles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His dsdale hand would faile and greatly faynt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her perfections with his error taynt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne Poets witt, that passeth Painter farre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In picturing the parts of beauty daynt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So hard a workemanship adventure darre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For fear, through want of words, her excellence to marre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>How then shall I, Apprentice to the skill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That whilome in divinest wits did rayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Presume so high to stretch mine humble quill?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet now my luckelesse lott doth me constrayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hereto perforce. But, O dredd Soverayne!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus far-forth pardon, sith that choicest witt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cannot your glorious pourtraicl: figure playne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I in colourd showes may shadow itt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And antique praises unto present persons fitt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But if in living colours, and right hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy selfe thou covet to see pictured,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who can it doe more lively, or more trew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then that sweete verse, with Nectar sprinckeled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which a gracious servaunt pictured</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His Cynthia, his heavens fayrest light?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with his melting sweetnes ravished,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with the wonder of her beames bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sences lulled are in slomber of delight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But let that same delitious Poet lend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A little leave unto a rusticke Muse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sing his mistresse prayse; and let him mend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If ought amis her liking may abuse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne let his fayrest Cynthia refuse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In mirrours more then one her selfe to see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But either Gloriana let her chuse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or in Belphcebe fashioned to bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In th'one her rule, in th'other her rare chastitee.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Guyon encountreth Britomart:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Fayre Florimell is chaced:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Duessaes traines and Malecastaes</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Champions are defaced.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The famous Briton Prince and Faerie knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After long wayes and perilous paines endur'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having their weary limbes to perfect plight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Restord, and sory wounds right well recur'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the faire Alma greatly were procur'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make there lenger sojourne and abode;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when thereto they might not be allur'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From seeking praise and deeds of armes abrode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They courteous conge tooke, and forth together yode.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But the captiv'd Acrasia he sent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because of traveill long, a nigher way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a strong gard, all reskew to prevent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her to Faery court safe to convay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her for witnes of his hard assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto his Faery Queene he might present:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he him selfe betooke another way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make more triall of his hardiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seek adventures as he with Prince Arthure went.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Long so they travelled through wastefull wayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where daungers dwelt, and perils most did wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hunt for glory and renowmed prayse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full many Countreyes they did overronne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the uprising to the setting Sunne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many hard adventures did atchieve;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the which they honour ever wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeking the weake oppressed to relieve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to recover right for such as wrong did grieve.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last, as through an open plaine they yode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They spide a knight that towards pricked fayre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him beside an aged Squire there rode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemd to couch under his shield three-square,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if that age badd him that burden spare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yield it those that stouter could it wield.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He them espying gan him selfe prepare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on his arme addresse his goodly shield</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That bore a Lion passant in a golden field.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which seeing, good Sir Guyon deare besought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Prince of grace to let him ronne that turne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He graunted: then the Faery quickly raught</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His poynant speare, and sharply gan to spurne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His fomy steed, whose fiery feete did burne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The verdant gras as he thereon did tread;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne did the other backe his foote returne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But fiercely forward came withouten dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bent his dreadful speare against the others head.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They beene ymett, and both theyr points arriv'd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Guyon drove so furious and fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemd both shield and plate it would have riv'd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nathelesse it bore his foe not from his sell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But made him stagger, as he were not well:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Guyon selfe, ere well he was aware,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nigh a speares length behind his crouper fell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet in his fall so well him selfe he bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That mischievous mischaunce his life and limbs did spare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Great shame and sorrow of that fall he tooke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For never yet, sith warlike armes he bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shivering speare in bloody field first shooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He fownd him selfe dishonored so sore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah! gentlest knight, that ever armor bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let not thee grieve dismounted to have beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And brought to grownd that never wast before;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For not thy fault, but secret powre unseene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That speare enchaunted was which layd thee on the greene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But weenedst thou what wight thee overthrew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much greater griefe and shamefuller regrett</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thy hard fortune then thou wouldst renew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of a single damzell thou wert mett</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On equall plaine, and there so hard besett:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even the famous Britomart it was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom straunge adventure did from Britayne sett</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke her lover (love far sought alas!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose image shee had scene in Venus looking glas.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Full of disdainefull wrath he fierce uprose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For to revenge that fowle reprochefull shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And snatching his bright sword began to close</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With her on foot, and stoutly forward came:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dye rather would he then endure that same.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when his Palmer saw, he gan to feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His toward perill, and untoward blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which by that new rencounter he should reare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For death sate on the point of that enchaunted speare</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And hasting towards him gan fayre perswade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not to provoke misfortune, nor to weene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His speares default to mend with cruell blade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For by his mightie Science he had scene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The secrete vertue of that weapon keene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That mortall puissaunce mote not withstond.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nothing on earth mote alwaies happy beene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great hazard were it, and adventure fond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To loose long gotten honour with one evill hond.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By such good meanes he him discounselled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From prosecuting his revenging rage:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the Prince like treaty handeled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His wrathfull will with reason to aswage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And laid the blame, not to his carriage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to his starting steed that swarv'd asyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the ill purveyaunce of his page,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That had his furnitures not firmely tyde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So is his angry corage fayrly pacifyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus reconcilement was betweene them knitt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through goodly temperaunce and affection chaste;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And either vowd with all their power and witt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To let not others honour be defaste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of friend or foe, who ever it embaste;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne armes to beare against the others syde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which accord the Prince was also plaste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with that golden chaine of concord tyde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So goodly all agreed they forth yfere did ryde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O! goodly usage of those antique tymes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which the sword was servaunt unto right;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When not for malice and contentious crymes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all for prayse, and proofe of manly might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The martiall brood accustomed to fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then honour was the meed of victory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet the vanquished had no despight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let later age that noble use envy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vyle rancor to avoid and cruel surquedry.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Long they thus travelled in friendly wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through countreyes waste, and eke well edifyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeking adventures hard, to exercise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their puissaunce, whylome full dernly tryde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At length they came into a forest wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose hideous horror and sad trembling sownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full griesly seemd: Therein they long did ryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet tract of living creature none they fownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save Beares, Lyons, and Buls, which romed them arownd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All suddenly out of the thickest brush,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a milkwhite Palfrey all alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A goodly Lady did foreby them rush,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose face did seeme as cleare as Christall stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke, through feare, as white as whales bone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her garments all were wrought of beaten gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all her steed with tinsell trappings shone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which fledd so fast that nothing mote him hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And scarse them leasure gave her passing to behold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Still as she fledd her eye she backward threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As fearing evill that poursewd her fast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her faire yellow locks behind her flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Loosely disperst with puff of every blast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All as a blazing starre doth farre outcast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His hearie beames, and flaming lockes dispredd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At sight whereof the people stand aghast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the sage wisard telles, as he has redd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it importunes death and dolefull dreryhedd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So as they gazed after her a whyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lo! where a griesly foster forth did rush,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Breathing out beastly lust her to defyle:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His tyreling Jade he fiersly forth did push</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through thicke and thin, both over banck and bush,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hope her to attaine by hooke or crooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from his gory sydes the blood did gush.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Large were his limbes, and terrible his looke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in his clownish hand a sharp bore speare he shooke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which outrage when those gentle knights did see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of great envy and fell gealosy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They stayd not to avise who first should bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all spurd after, fast as they mote fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To reskew her from shamefull villany.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Prince and Guyon equally bylive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her selfe pursewd, in hope to win thereby</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most goodly meede, the fairest Dame alive:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But after the foule foster Timias did strive.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The whiles faire Britomart, whose constant mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would not so lightly follow beauties chace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne reckt of Ladies Love, did stay behynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And them awayted there a certaine space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet if they would turne backe to that place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when she saw them gone she forward went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As lay her journey, through that perlous Pace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With stedfast corage and stout hardiment:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne evil thing she feard, ne evill thing she ment.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last, as nigh out of the wood she came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A stately Castle far away she spyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which her steps direclly she did frame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Castle was most goodly edifyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And plaste for pleasure nigh that forrest syde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But faire before the gate a spatious playne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mantled with greene, it selfe did spredden wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which she saw six knights, that did darrayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fiers battaill against one with cruell might and mayne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Mainely they all attonce upon him laid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sore beset on every side arownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nigh he breathlesse grew, yet nought dismaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever to them yielded foot of grownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All had he lost much blood through many a wovvnd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But stoutly dealt his blowes, and every way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which he turned in his wrathfull stownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made them recoile, and fly from dredd decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That none of all the six before him durst assay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like dastard Curres that, having at a bay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The salvage beast embost in wearie chace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dare not adventure on the stubborne pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne byte before, but rome from place to place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To get a snatch when turned is his face.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In such distresse and doubtfull jeopardy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When Britomart him saw, she ran apace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto his reskew, and with earnest cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Badd those same six forbeare that single enimy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But to her cry they list not lenden care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought the more their mightie strokes surceasse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But gathering him rownd about more neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their direfull rancour rather did encreasse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that she rushing through the thickest preasse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perforce disparted their compacted gyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soone compeld to hearken unto peace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho gan she myldly of them to inquyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cause of their dissention and outrageous yre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whereto that single knight did answere frame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"These six would me enforce by oddes of might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To chaunge my liefe, and love another Dame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That death me liefer were then such despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So unto wrong to yield my wrested right:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For I love one, the truest one on grownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne list me chaunge; she th' Errant Damzell hight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For whose deare sake full many a bitter stownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have endurd, and tasted many a bloody wownd."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Certes," (said she) "then beene ye sixe to blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weene your wrong by force to justify;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For knight to leave his Lady were great shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That faithfull is, and better were to dy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All losse is lesse, and lesse the infamy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then losse of love to him that loves but one:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne may love be compeld by maistery;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For soone as maistery comes sweet Love anone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Taketh his nimble winges, and soone away is gone."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then spake one of those six; "There dwelleth here</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within this castle wall a Lady fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose soveraine beautie hath no living pere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereto so bounteous and so debonayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That never any mote with her compayre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She hath ordaind this law, which we approve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That every knight which doth this way repayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In case he have no Lady nor no love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall doe unto her service, never to remove:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But if he have a Lady or a Love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then must he her forgoe with fowle defame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or els with us by dint of sword approve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she is fairer then our fairest Dame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As did this knight, before ye hither came."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Perdy," (said Britomart) "the choise is hard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But what reward had he that overcame?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"He should advaunced bee to high regard,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Said they) "and have our Ladies love for his reward.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Therefore aread, Sir, if thou have a love."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Love have I sure," (quoth she) "but Lady none;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet will I not fro mine own love remove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne to your Lady will I service done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wreake your wronges wrought to this knight alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And prove his cause." With that, her mortall speare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She mightily aventred towards one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And downe him smot ere well aware he weare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then to the next she rode, and downe the next did beare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne did she stay till three on ground she layd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none of them himselfe could reare againe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fourth was by that other knight dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All were he wearie of his former paine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That now there do but two of six remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which two did yield before she did them smight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ah!" (said she then) "now may ye all see plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That truth is strong, and trew love most of might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That for his trusty servaunts doth so strongly fight."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Too well we see," (saide they) "and prove too well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our faulty weakenes, and your matchlesse might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forthy, faire Sir, yours be the Damozell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which by her owne law to your lot doth light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And we your liegemen faith unto you plight."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So underneath her feet their swords they mard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, after, her besought, well as they might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To enter in and reape the dew reward.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She graunted; and then in they all together far'd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Long were it to describe the goodly frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stately port of Castle Joyeous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(For so that Castle hight by commun name)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where they were entertaynd with courteous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And comely glee of many gratious</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Ladies, and of many a gentle knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, through a Chamber long and spacious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones them brought unto their Ladies sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That of them cleeped was the Lady of Delight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But for to tell the sumptuous aray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that great chamber, should be labour lost;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For living wit, I weene, cannot display</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The royall riches and exceeding cost</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of every pillour and of every post,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which all of purest bullion framed were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with great perles and pretious stones embost;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the bright glister of their beames cleare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did sparckle forth great light, and glorious did appeare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>These stranger knights, through passing, forth were led</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into an inner rowme, whose royaltee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rich purveyance might uneath be red;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mote Princes place be seeme so deckt to bee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which stately manner whenas they did see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The image of superfluous riotize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Exceeding much the state of meane degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They greatly wondred whence so sumptuous guize</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might be maintaynd, and each gan diversely devize.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The wals were round about appareiled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With costly clothes of Arras and of Toure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which with cunning hand was pourtrahed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The love of Venus and her Paramoure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fayre Adonis, turned to a flowre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A worke of rare device and wondrous wit.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First did it shew the bitter balefull stowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which her essayd with many a fervent fit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When first her tender hart was with his beautie smit.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then with what sleights and sweet allurements she</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Entyst the Boy, as well that art she knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wooed him her Paramoure to bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now making girlonds of each flowre that grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To crowne his golden lockes with honour dew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now leading him into a secret shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From his Beauperes, and from bright heavens vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where him to sleepe she gently would perswade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or bathe him in a fountaine by some covert glade:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And whilst he slept she over him would spred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her mantle, colour'd like the starry skyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her soft arme lay underneath his hed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with ambrosiall kisses bathe his eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And whilst he bath'd with her two crafty spyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She secretly would search each daintie lim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And throw into the well sweet Rosemaryes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fragrant violets, and Paunces trim;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ever with sweet Nectar she did sprinkle him.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So did she steale his heedelesse hart away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And joyd his love in secret unespyde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But for she saw him bent to cruell play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hunt the salvage beast in forrest wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dreadfull of daunger that mote him betyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She oft and oft adviz'd him to refraine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From chase of greater beastes, whose brutish pryde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mote breede him scath unwares: but all in vaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For who can shun the chance that dest'ny doth ordaine?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lo! where beyond he lyeth languishing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deadly engored of a great wilde Bore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by his side the Goddesse groveling</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Makes for him endlesse mone, and evermore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With her soft garment wipes away the gore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which staynes his snowy skin with hatefull hew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when she saw no helpe might him restore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him to a dainty flowre she did transmew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which in that cloth was wrought as if it lively grew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So was that chamber clad in goodly wize:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rownd about it many beds were dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As whylome was the antique worldes guize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some for untimely ease, some for delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As pleased them to use that use it might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all was full of Damzels and of Squyres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dauncing and reveling both day and night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And swimming deepe in sensuall desyres;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Cupid still emongest them kindled lustfull fyres.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And all the while sweet Musicke did divide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her looser notes with Lydian harmony;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the while sweet birdes thereto applide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their daintie layes and dulcet melody,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ay caroling of love and jollity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That wonder was to heare their trim consort.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when those knights beheld, with scornefull eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They sdeigned such lascivious disport,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And loath'd the loose demeanure of that wanton sort.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thence they were brought to that great Ladies vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom they found sitting on a sumptuous bed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That glistred all with gold and glorious shew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As the proud Persian Queenes accustomed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She seemd a woman of great bountihed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of rare beautie, saving that askaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her wanton eyes, ill signes of womanhed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did roll too lightly, and too often glaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without regard of grace or comely amenaunce.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Long worke it were, and needlesse, to devize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their goodly entertainement and great glee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She caused them be led in courteous wize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into a bowre, disarmed for to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cheared well with wine and spiceree:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Redcrosse Knight was soon disarmed there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the brave Mayd would not disarmed bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But onely vented up her umbriere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so did let her goodly visage to appere.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when fayre Cynthia, in darkesome night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is in a noyous cloud enveloped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where she may finde the substance thin and light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Breakes forth her silver beames, and her bright bed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Discovers to the world discomfited:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the poore traveiler that went astray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With thousand blessings she is heried.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such was the beautie and the shining ray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With which fayre Britomart gave light unto the day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And eke those six, which lately with her fought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now were disarmd, and did them selves present</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto her vew, and company unsought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For they all seemed courteous and gent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all sixe brethren, borne of one parent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which had them traynd in all civilitee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And goodly taught to tilt and turnament:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now were they liegmen to this Ladie free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her knights service ought, to hold of her in fee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The first of them by name Gardante hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A jolly person, and of comely vew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The second was Parlante, a bold knight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And next to him Jocante did ensew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Basciante did him selfe most courteous shew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But fierce Bacchante seemd too fell and keene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yett in armes Noclante greater grew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All were faire knights, and goodly well beseene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to faire Britomart they all but shadowes beene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For shee was full of amiable grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And manly terror mixed therewithall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That as the one stird up affections bace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So th'other did mens rash desires apall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hold them backe that would in error fall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As hee that hath espide a vermeill Rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which sharp thornes and breres the way forstall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dare not for dread his hardy hand expose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But wishing it far off his ydle wish doth lose.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when the Lady saw so faire a wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All ignorant of her contrary sex,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(For shee her weend a fresh and lusty knight,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee greatly gan enamoured to wex</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with vaine thoughts her falsed fancy vex:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her fickle hart conceived hasty fyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like'sparkes of fire which fall in sclender flex,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Shortly brent into extreme desyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ransackt all her veines with passion entyre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones shee grew to great impatience,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And into termes of open outrage brust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That plaine discovered her incontinence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne reckt shee who her meaning did mistrust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she was given all to fleshly lust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And poured forth in sensuall delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all regard of shame she had discust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And meet respect of honor putt to flight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So shamelesse beauty soone becomes a loathly sight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Faire Ladies, that to love captived arre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chaste desires doe nourish in your mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let not her fault your sweete affections marre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne blott the bounty of all womankind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">'Mongst thousands good one wanton Dame to find:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emongst the Roses grow some wicked weeds:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For this was not to love, but lust, inclind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For love does alwaies bring forth bounteous deeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in each gentle hart desire of honor breeds.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nought so of love this looser Dame did skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But as a coale to kindle fleshly flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Giving the bridle to her wanton will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And treading under foote her honest name:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such love is hate, and such desire is shame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still did she rove at her with crafty glaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her false eies, that at her hart did ayme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And told her meaning in her countenaunce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Britomart dissembled it with ignoraunce.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Supper was shortly dight, and downe they sat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where they were served with all sumptuous fare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles fruitfull Ceres and Lyaeus fat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pourd out their plenty without spight or spare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nought wanted there that dainty was and rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And aye the cups their bancks did overflow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And aye betweene the cups she did prepare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Way to her love, and secret darts did throw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Britomart would not such guilfull message know.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So, when they slaked had the fervent heat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of appetite with meates of every sort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Lady did faire Britomart entreat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her to disarme, and with delightfull sport</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To loose her warlike limbs and strong effort;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when shee mote not thereunto be wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(For shee her sexe under that straunge purport</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did use to hide, and plaine apparaunce shonne)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In playner wise to tell her grievaunce she begonne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And all attonce discovered her desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sighes, and sobs, and plaints, and piteous griefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The outward sparkes of her inburning fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which spent in vaine, at last she told her briefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That but if she did lend her short reliefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doe her comfort, she mote algates dye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the chaste damzell, that had never priefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of such malengine and fine forgerye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did easely beleeve her strong extremitye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Full easy was for her to have beliefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who by self-feeling of her feeble sexe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by long triall of the inward griefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith imperious love her hart did vexe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could judge what paines doe loving harts perplexe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who meanes no guile be guiled soonest shall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to faire semblaunce doth light faith annexe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bird that knowes not the false fowlers call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into his hidden nett full easely doth fall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Forthy she would not in discourteise wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Scorne the faire offer of good will profest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For great rebuke it is love to despise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or rudely sdeigne a gentle harts request;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with faire countenaunce, as beseemed best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her entertaynd: nath'lesse shee inly deemd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her love too light, to wooe a wandring guest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which she misconstruing, thereby esteemd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That from like inward fire that outward smoke had steemd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith a while she her flit fancy fedd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till she mote winne fit time for her desire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yet her wound still inward freshly bledd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through her bones the false instilled fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did spred itself, and venime close inspire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho were the tables taken all away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every knight, and every gentle Squire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan choose his Dame with Bascimano gay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With whom he ment to make his sport and courtly play.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Some fell to daunce, some fell to hazardry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some to make love, some to make meryment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As diverse witts to diverse things apply;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the while faire Malecasta bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her crafty engins to her close intent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By this th'eternall lampes, wherewith high Jove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth light the lower world, were halfe yspent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the moist daughters of huge Atlas strove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the Ocean deepe to drive their weary drove.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>High time it seemed then for every wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them to betake unto their kindly rest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftesoones long waxen torches weren light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto their bowres to guyden every guest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, when the Britonesse saw all the rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Avoided quite, she gan her selfe despoile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And safe cpmmitt to her soft fethered nest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wher through long watch, and late daies weary toile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She soundly slept, and carefull thoughts did quite assoile.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now whenas all the world in silence deepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yshrowded was, and every mortall wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was drowned in the depth of deadly sleepe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Malecasta, whose en grieved spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could find no rest in such perplexed plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lightly arose out of her wearie bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, under the blacke vele of guilty Night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her with a scarlott mantle covered</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That was with gold and Ermines faire enveloped.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then panting softe, and trembling every joynt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her fearfull feete towards the bowre she mov'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where she for secret purpose did appoynt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To lodge the warlike maide, unwisely loov'd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, to her bed approching, first she proov'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether she slept or wakte: with her softe hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She softely felt if any member moov'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lent her wary eare to understand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If any puffe of breath or signe of sence shee fond.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which whenas none she fond, with easy shifte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For feare least her unwares she should abrayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th'embroder'd quilt she lightly up did lifte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by her side her selfe she softly layd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of every finest fingers touch affrayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne any noise she made, ne word she spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But inly sigh'd. At last the royall Mayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of her quiet slomber did awake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And chaunged her weary side the better ease to take.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Where feeling one close couched by her side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She lightly lept out of her filed bedd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to her weapon ran, in minde to gride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The loathed leachour. But the Dame, halfe dedd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through suddein feare and ghastly drerihedd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did shrieke alowd, that through the hous it rong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the whole family, therewith adredd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rashly out of their rouzed couches sprong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the troubled chamber all in armes did throng.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And those sixe knights, that ladies Champions</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the Redcrosse knightjjan to the stownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Halfe armd and halfe unarmd, with them attons:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where when confusedly they came, they fownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their lady lying on the sencelesse grownd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On thother side they saw the warlike Mayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Al in her snow-white smocke, with locks unbownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Threatning the point of her avenging blaed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That with so troublous terror they were all dismayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>About their Ladye first they flockt arownd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom having laid in comfortable couch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shortly they reard out of her frosen swownd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And afterwardes they gan with fowle reproch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To stirre up strife, and troublous contecke broch:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by ensample of the last dayes losse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">None of them rashly durst to her approch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne in so glorious spoile themselves embosse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her succourd eke the Champion of the bloody Crosse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But one of those sixe knights, Gardante hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drew out a deadly bow and arrow keene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which forth be sent, with felonous despight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fell intent, against the virgin sheene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The mortall steele stayd not till it was scene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To gore her side; yet was the wound not deepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But lightly rased her soft silken skin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That drops of purple blood thereout did weepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which did her lilly smock with staines of vermeil steep.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Wherewith erirag'd she fiercely at them flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with her flaming sword about her layd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none of them foule mischiefe could eschew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with her dreadfull strokes were all dismayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here, there, and every where, about her swayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her wrathfull steele, that none mote it abyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the Redcrosse knight gave her good ayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ay joyning foot to foot, and syde to syde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in short space their foes they have quite terrify de.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho, whenas all were put to shamefull flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The noble Britomartis her arayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her bright armes about her body dight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For nothing would she lenger there be stayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where so loose life, and so ungentle trade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was usd of knightes and Ladies seeming gent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So earely, ere the grosse Earthes gryesy shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was all disperst out of the firmament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They tooke their steeds, and forth upon their journey went.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The Redcrosse knight to Britomart</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Describeth Artegall:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The wondrous myrrhour, by which she</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In love with him did fall.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Here have I cause in men just blame to find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in their proper praise too partiall bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And not indifferent to woman kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom no share in armes and chevalree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They doe impart, ne maken memoree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of their brave gestes and prowesse martiall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Scarse do they spare to one, or two, or three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rowme in their writtes; yet the same writing small</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Does all their deedes deface, and dims their glories all.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But by record of antique times I finde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That wemen wont in warres to beare most sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to all great exploites them selves inclind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which they still the girlond bore away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till envious Men, fearing their rules decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan coyne streight lawes to curb their liberty:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet sith they warlike armes have laide away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They have exceld in artes and pollicy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That now we foolish men that prayse gin eke t'envy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Of warlike puissaunce in ages spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be thou, faire Britomart, whose prayse I wryte;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But of all wisedom bee thou precedent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O soveraine Queene! whose prayse I would endyte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Endite I would as dewtie doth excyte;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But ah! my rymes too rude and rugged arre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When in so high an objedt they do lyte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, striving fit to make, I feare, doe marre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy selfe thy prayses tell, and make them knowen farre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She, travelling with Guyon, by the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of sondry thinges faire purpose gan to find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T'abridg their journey long, and lingring day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst which it fell into that Fairies mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To aske this Briton Maid, what uncouth wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Brought her into those partes, and what inquest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made her dissemble her disguised kind?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Lady she him seemd, like Lady drest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But fairest knight alive, when armed was her brest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereat she sighing softly had no powre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To speake a while, ne ready answere make;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with hart-thrilling throbs and bitter stowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if she had a fever fitt, did quake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every daintie limbe with horrour shake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever and anone the rosy red</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flasht through her face, as it had beene a flake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of lightning through bright heven fulmined:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last, the passion past, she thus him answered.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Faire Sir, I let you weete, that from the howre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I taken was from nourses tender pap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I have been trained up in warlike stowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tossen speare and shield, and to affrap</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The warlike ryder to his most mishap:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sithence I loathed have my life to lead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Ladies wont, in pleasures wanton lap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To finger the fine needle and nyce thread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me lever were with point of foemans speare be dead.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"All my delight on deedes of armes is set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hunt out perilles and adventures hard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By sea, by land, where so they may be met,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Onely for honour and for high regard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without respedl of richesse or reward:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For such intent into these partes I came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withouten compasse or withouten card,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far fro my native soyle, that is by name</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The greater Brytayne, here to seek for praise and fame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Fame blazed hath, that here in Faery lond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe many famous Knightes and Ladies wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many straunge adventures to bee fond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which great worth and worship may be wonne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to prove, I this voyage have begonne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But mote I weet of you, right courteous knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tydings of one that hath unto me donne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Late foule dishonour and reprochfull spight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which I seeke to wreake, and Arthegall he hight."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The worde gone out she backe againe would call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As her repenting so to have missayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that he, it uptaking ere the fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her shortly answered: "Faire martiall Mayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Certes ye misavised beene t'upbrayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A gentle knight with so unknightly blame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, weet ye well, of all that ever playd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At tilt or tourney, or like warlike game,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The noble Arthegall hath ever borne the name.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Forthy great wonder were it, if such shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should ever enter in his bounteous thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ever doe that mote deserven blame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The noble corage never weeneth ought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That may unworthy of it selfe be thought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore, faire Damzell, be ye well aware,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least that too farre ye have your sorrow sought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You and your countrey both J wish welfare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And honour both; for each of other worthy are."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The royall Maid woxe inly wondrous glad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To heare her Love so highly magnifyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And joyd that ever she affixed had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her hart on knight so goodly glorifyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How ever finely she it faind to hyde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The loving mother, that nine monethes did beare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the deare closett of her painefull syde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her tender babe, it seeing safe appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth not so much rejoyce as she rejoyced theare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But to occasion him to further talke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To feed her humor with his pleasing style,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her list in stryfull termes with him to balke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thus replyde: "How ever, Sir, ye fyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your courteous tongue his prayses to compyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It ill beseemes a knight of gentle sort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as ye have him boasted, to beguyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A simple maide, and worke so hainous tort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In shame of knighthood, as I largely can report.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Let bee therefore my vengeaunce to disswade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And read where I that fay tour false may find."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ah! bat if reason faire might you perswade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To slake your wrath, and mollify your mind,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Said he) "perhaps ye should it better find:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For hardie thing it is, to weene by might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That man to hard conditions to bind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ever hope to match in equall fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose prowesse paragone saw never living wight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ne soothlich is it easie for to read</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where now on earth, or how, he may be fownd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he ne wonneth in one certeine stead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But restlesse walketh all the world arownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ay doing thinges that to his fame redownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Defending Ladies cause and Orphans right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereso he heares that any doth confownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them comfortlesse through tyranny or might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So is his soveraine honour raisde to hevens hight."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His feeling wordes her feeble sence much pleased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And softly sunck into her molten hart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hart that is inly hurt is greatly eased</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hope of thing that may allegge his smart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For pleasing wordes are like to Magick art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That doth the charmed Snake in slomber lay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such secrete ease felt gentle Britomart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet list the same efforce with faind gainesay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So dischord ofte in Musick makes the sweeter lay:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And sayd; "Sir knight, these ydle termes forbeare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, sith it is uneath to finde his haunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tell me some markes by which he may appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If chaunce I him encounter paravaunt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For perdy one shall other slay, or daunt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What shape, what shield, what armes, what steed, what stedd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And what so else his person most may vaunt?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which the Redcrosse knight to point aredd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And him in everie part before her fashioned.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet him in everie part before she knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">However list her now her knowledge fayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith him whylome in Britayne she did vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To her revealed in a mirrhour playne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof did grow her first engraffed payne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose root and stalke so bitter yet dicf taste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That but the fruit more sweetnes did contayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her wretched dayes in dolour she mote waste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yield the pray of love to lothsome death at last.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By straunge occasion she did him behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And much more straungely gan to love his sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As it in bookes hath written beene of old.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Deheubarth, that now South-wales is hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What time king Ryence raign'd and dealed right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The great Magitien Merlin had deviz'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By his deepe science and hell-dreaded might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A looking glasse, right wondrously aguiz'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose vertues through the wyde worlde soone were solemniz'd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It vertue had to shew in perfect sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whatever thing was in the world contaynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Betwixt the lowest earth and hevens hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that it to the looker appertaynd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whatever foe had wrought, or frend had faynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therein discovered was, ne ought mote pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought in secret from the same rernaynd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forthy it round and hollow shaped was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like to the world itselfe, and seemd a world of glas.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>wonders not, that reades so wonderous worke?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But who does wonder, that has red the Towre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein th'Aegyptian Phao long did lurke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From all mens vew, that none might her discoure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet she might all men vew out of her bowre?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great Ptolomaee it for his lemans sake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ybuilded all of glasse, by Magicke powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And also it impregnable did make;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet when his love was false he with a peaze it brake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such was the glassy globe that Merlin made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gave unto king Ryence for his gard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That never foes his kingdome might invade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he it knew at home before he hard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tydings thereof, and so them still debar'd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It was a famous Present for a Prince,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And worthy worke of infinite reward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That treasons could bewray, and foes convince</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Happy this Realme, had it remayned ever since!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One day it fortuned fayre Britomart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into her fathers closet to repayre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For nothing he from her reserv'd apart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being his onely daughter and his hayre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where when she had espyde that mirrhour fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her selfe awhile therein she vewd in vaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, her avizing of the vertues rare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which thereof spoken were, she gan againe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her to bethinke of that mote to her selfe pertaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But as it falleth, in the gentlest harts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Imperious Love hath highest set his throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tyrannizeth in the bitter smarts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of them that to him buxome are and prone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So thought this Mayd (as maydens use to done)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom fortune for her husband would allot:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not that she lusted after any one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she was pure from blame of sinfull blott;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet wist her life at last must lincke in that same knot.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones there was presented to her eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A comely knight; all arm'd in complete wize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through whose bright ventayle, lifted up on hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His manly face, that did his foes agrize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And frends to termes of gentle truce entize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lookt foorth, as Phoebus face out of the east</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Betwixt two shady mountaynes doth arize:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Portly his person was, and much increast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through his Heroicke grace and honorable gest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His crest was covered with a couchant Hownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all his armour seem'd of antique mould,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wondrous massie and assured sownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And round about yfretted all with gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which there written was, with cyphres old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">
						<i>Achilles armes, which Art he gall did win:</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on his shield enveloped sevenfold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He bore a crowned little Ermelin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That deckt the azure field with her fayre pouldred skin.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Damzell well did vew his Personage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And liked well, ne further fastned not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But went her way; ne her unguilty age</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did weene, unwares, triat her unlucky lot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lay hidden in the bottome of the pot.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of hurt unwist most daunger doth redound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the false Archer, which that arrow shot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So slyly that she did not feele the wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did smyle full smoothly at her weetlesse wofull stound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thenceforth the fether in her lofty crest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ruffed of love, gan lowly to availe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her prowd portaunce and her princely gest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which she earst tryumphed, now did quaile:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sad, solemne, sowre, and full of fancies fraile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She woxe; yet wist she nether how, nor why.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She wist not, silly Mayd, what she did aile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet wist she was not well at ease perdy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet thought it was not love, but some melancholy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So soone as Night had with her pallid hew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Defaste the beautie of the shyning skye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And refte from men the worldes desired vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She with her Nourse adowne to sleepe did lye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But sleepe full far away from her did fly:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In stead thereof sad sighes and sorrowes deepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kept watch and ward about her warily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nought she did but wayle, and often steepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her dainty couch with teares which closely she did weepe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And if that any drop of slombring rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did chaunce to still into her weary spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When feeble nature felt her selfe opprest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Streight-way with dreames, and with fantastick sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of dreadfull things, the same was put to flight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That oft out of her bed she did astart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one with vew of ghastly feends affright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho gan she to renew her former smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thinke of that fayre visage written in her hart.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One night, when she was tost with such unrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her aged Nourse, whose name was (trlauce hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">r eelmg her leape out or her loathed nest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Betwixt her feeble armes her quickly keight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And downe againe her in her warme bed dight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ah! my deare daughter, ah! my dearest dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What uncouth fit," (sayd she) "what evill plight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath thee opprest, and with sad drearyhead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chaunged thy lively cheare, and living made thee dead?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"For not of nought these suddein ghastly feares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All night afflict thy naturall repose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the day, when as thine equall peares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their fit disports with faire delight doe chose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou in dull corners doest thy selfe inclose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne tastest Princes pleasures, ne doest spred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abroad thy fresh youths fayrest flowre, but lose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both leafe and fruite, both too untimely shed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As one in wilfull bale for ever buried.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"The time that mortall men their weary cares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do lay away, and all wilde beastes do rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every river eke his course forbeares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then doth this wicked evill thee infest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rive with thousand throbs thy thrilled brest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like an huge Aetn' of deepe engulfed gryefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sorrow is heaped in thy hollow chest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence foorth it breakes in sighes and anguish ryfe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As smoke and sulphure mingled with confused stryfe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ay me! how much I feare least love it bee!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if that love it be, as sure I read</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By knowen signes and passions which I see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be it worthy of thy race and royall sead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then I avow, by this most sacred head</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of my deare foster childe, to ease thy griefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And win thy will: Therefore away doe dread;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For death nor daunger from thy dew reliefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall me debarre: tell me therefore, my liefest liefe!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So having sayd, her twixt her armes twaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee streightly straynd, and colled tenderly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every trembling joynt and every vaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee softly felt, and rubbed busily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To doe the frosen cold away to fly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her faire deawy eies with kisses deare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee ofte did bathe, and ofte againe did dry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever her importund not to feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To let the secret of her hart to her appeare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Damzell pauzd; and then thus fearfully:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ah! Nurse, what needeth thee to eke my payne?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is not enough that I alone doe dye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But it must doubled bee with death of twaine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For nought for me but death there doth remaine."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"O daughter deare!" (said she) "despeire no whit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For never sore but might a salve obtaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That blinded God, which hath ye blindly smit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another arrow hath your lovers hart to hit."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But mine is not" (quoth she) "like other wownd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which no reason can finde remedy."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Was never such, but mote the like be fownd,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Said she) "and though no reason may apply</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Salve to your sore, yet love can higher stye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then reasons reach, and oft hath wonders donne."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"But neither God of love nor God of skye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can doe" (said she) "that which cannot be donne."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Things ofte impossible" (quoth she) "seeme, ere begonne."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"These idle wordes" (said she) "doe nought aswage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My stubborne smart, but more annoiaunce breed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For no, no usuall fire, no usuall rage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yt is, O Nourse! which on my life doth feed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sucks the blood which from my hart doth bleed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But since thy faithful zele lets me not hyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My crime, (if crime it be) I will it reed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor Prince nor pere it is, whose love hath gryde</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My feeble brest of late, and launched this wound wyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Nor man it is, nor other living wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For then some hope I might unto me draw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But th'only shade and semblant of a knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose shape or person yet I never saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath me subjected to loves cruell law:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The same one day, as me misfortune led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I in my fathers wondrous mirrhour saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, pleased with that seeming goodly-hed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unwares the hidden hooke with baite I swallowed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Sithcns it hath infixed faster hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within my bleeding bowells, and so sore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now ranckleth in this same fraile fleshly mould,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all my entrailes flow with poisnous gore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And th'ulcer groweth daily more and more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne can my ronning sore finde remedee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Other then my hard fortune to deplore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And languish, as the leafe fain from the tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till death make one end of my daies and miseree!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Daughter," (said she) "what need ye be dismayd?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or why make ye such Monster of your minde?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of much more uncouth thing I was affrayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of filthy lust, contrary unto kinde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But this affection nothing straunge I finde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For who with reason can you aye reprove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To love the semblaunt pleasing most your minde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yield your heart whence ye cannot remove?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No guilt in you, but in the tyranny of love.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Not so th'Arabian Myrrhe did set her mynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor so did Biblis spend her pining hart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But lov'd their native flesh against al kynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to their purpose used wicked art:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet playd Pasiphae a more monstrous part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That lov'd a Bui, and learnd a beast to bee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such shamefull lustes who loaths not, which depart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From course of nature and of modestee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweete love such lewdnes bands from his fairc companee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But thine, my Deare, (welfare thy heart, my deare!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though straunge beginning had, yet fixed is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On one that worthy may perhaps appeare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And certes seemes bestowed not amis:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Joy thereof have thou and eternall blis 1"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that, upleaning on her elbow weake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her alablaster brest she soft did kis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which all that while shee felt to pant and quake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As it an Earth-quake were: at last she thus bespake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Beldame, your words doe worke me litle ease;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For though my love be not so lewdly bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As those ye blame, yet may it nought appease</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My raging smart, ne ought my flame relent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But rather doth my helpelesse griefe augment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For they, how ever shamefull and unkinde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet did possesse their horrible intent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Short end of sorrowes they therby did finde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So was their fortune good, though wicked were their minde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But wicked fortune mine, though minde be good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can have no ende nor hope of my desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But feed on shadowes whiles I die for food,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And like a shadowe wexe, whiles with entire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Affection I doe languish and expire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I, fonder then Cephisus foolish chyld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, having vewed in a fountaine shere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His face, was with the love thereof beguyld;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I, fonder, love a shade, the body far exyld."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Nought like," (quoth shee) "for that same wretched boy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was of him selfe the ydle Paramoure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both love and lover, without hope of joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which he faded to a watry flowre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But better fortune thine, and better howre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which lov'st the shadow of a warlike knight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No shadow but a body hath in powre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That body, wheresoever that it light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May learned be by cyphers, or by Magicke might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But if thou may with reason yet represse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The growing evill, ere it strength have gott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thee abandond wholy do possesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against it strongly strive, and yield thee nott</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Til thou in open fielde adowne be smott:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if the passion mayster thy fraile might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that needs love or death must bee thy lott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, I avow to thee, by wrong or right</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To compas thy desire, and find that loved knight."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her chearefull words much cheard the feeble spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the sicke virgin, that her downe she layd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In her warme bed to sleepe, if that she might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the old-woman carefully displayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The clothes about her round with busy ayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that at last a litle creeping sleepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Surprisd her sence: SKee, therewith well apayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dronken lamp down in the oyl did steepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sett her by to watch, and sett her by to weepe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Earely, the morrow next, before that day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His joyous face did to the world revele,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They both uprose and tooke their ready way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the Church, their praiers to appele</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With great devotion, and with little zele:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the faire Damzel from the holy herse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her love-sicke hart to other thoughts did steale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that old Dame said many an idle verse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of her daughters hart fond fancies to reverse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Retourned home, the royall Infant fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into her former fitt; for-why no powre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor guidaunce of herselfe in her did dwell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But th'aged Nourse, her calling to her bowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had gathered Rew, and Savine, and the flowre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Camphora, and Calamint, and Dill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which she in a earthen Pot did poure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the brim with Coltwood did it fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many drops of milk and blood through it did spill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then, taking thrise three heares from off her head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them trebly breaded in a threefold lace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And round about the Pots mouth bound the thread;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, after having whispered a space</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Certein sad words with hollow voice and bace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee to the virgin sayd, thrise sayd she itt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Come daughter, come; come, spit upon my face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spitt thrise upon me, thrise upon me spitt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th'uneven nomber for this busines is most fitt."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That sayd, her rownd about she from her turnd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She turned her contrary to the Sunne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrise she her turnd contrary, and returnd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All contrary; for she the right did shunne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever what she did was streight undonne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So thought she to undoe her daughters love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But love, that is in gentle brest begonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No ydle charmes so lightly may remove:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That well can witnesse who by tryall it does prove.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne ought it mote the noble Mayd avayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne slake the fury of her cruell flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that shee still did waste, and still did wayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, through long languour and hart-burning brame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She shortly like a pyned ghost became</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which long hath waited by the Stygian strond.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That when old Glauce saw, for feare least blame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her miscarriage should in her be fond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She wist not how t'amend, nor how it to withstond.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-3" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Merlin bawrayes to Britomart</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The state of Artegall;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And shewes the famous Progeny</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Which from them springen shall.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Most sacred fyre, that burnest mightily</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In living brests, ykindled first above</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emongst th'eternall spheres and lamping sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thence pourd into men, which men call Love!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not that same, which doth base affections move</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In brutish mindes, and filthy lust inflame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that sweete fit that doth true beautie love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And choseth vertue for his dearest Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence spring all noble deedes and never dying fame:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Well did Antiquity a God thee deeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That over mortall mindes hast so great might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To order them as best to thee doth seeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all their actions to direct aright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fatall purpose of divine foresight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou doest effect in destined descents,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through deepe impression of thy secret might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stirredst up th' Heroes high intents,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which the late world admyres for wondrous moniments.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But thy dredd dartes in none doe triumph more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne braver proofe in any of thy powre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shewd'st thou, then in this royall Maid of yore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Making her seeke an unknowne Paramoure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the worlds end, through many a bitter stowre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whose two loynes thou afterwardes did rayse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most famous fruites of matrimoniall bowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which through the earth have spredd their living prayse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That fame in tromp of gold eternally displayes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Begin then, O my dearest sacred Dame!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Daughter of Phoebus and of Memorye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That doest ennoble with immortall name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The warlike Worthies, from antiquitye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In thy great volume of Eternitye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Begin, O Clio! and recount from hence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My glorious Soveraines goodly auncestrye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that by dew degrees, and long pretense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou have it lastly brought unto her Excellence.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Full many wayes within her troubled mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Old Glauce cast to cure this Ladies griefe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full many waies she sought, but none could find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor herbes, nor charmes, nor counsel, that is chiefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And choicest med'cine for sick harts reliefe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forthy great care she tooke, and greater feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least that it should her turne to fowle repriefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sore reproch, when so her father deare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should of his dearest daughters hard misfortune heare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last she her avisde, that he which made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That mirrhour, wherein the sicke Damosell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So straungely vewed her straunge lovers shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet, the learned Merlin, well could tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under what coast of heaven the man did dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by what means his love might best be wrought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, though beyond the Africk Ismael</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or th' Indian Peru he were, she thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him forth through infinite endevour to have sought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Forthwith them selves disguising both in straunge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And base atyre, that none might them bewray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Maridunum, that is now by chaunge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of name Cayr-Merdin cald, they tooke their way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There the wise Merlin whylome wont (they say)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make his wonne, low underneath the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In a deepe delve, farre from the vew of day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of no living wight he mote be found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When so he counseld with his sp rights encompast round.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, if thou ever happen that same way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To travell, go to see that dreadfull place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It is an hideous hollow cave (they say)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under a Rock that lyes a litle space</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the swift Barry, tombling downe apace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emongst the woody hilles of Dynevowre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But dare thou not, I charge, in any cace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To enter into that same balefull Bowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For feare the cruell Feendes should thee unwares devowre</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But standing high aloft low lay thine eare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there such ghastly noise of yron chaines</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And brasen Caudrons thou shalt rombling heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which thousand sprights with long enduring paines</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe tosse, that it will stonne thy feeble braines;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oftentimes great grones, and grievous stownds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When too huge toile and labour them constraines:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oftentimes loud strokes and ringing sowndes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From under that deepe Rock most horribly rebowndes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The cause, some say, is this: A litle whyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before that Merlin dyde, he did intend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A brasen wall in compas to compyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About Cairmardin, and did it commend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto these Sprights to bring to perfect end:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">During which worke the Lady of the Lake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom long he lov'd, for him in hast did send;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, thereby forst his workemen to forsake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Them bownd till his retourne their labour not to slake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In the meane time, through that false Ladies traine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He was surprisd, and buried under beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever to his worke returnd againe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nath'lesse those feends may not their work forbeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So greatly his commandement they feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But there doe toyle and traveile day and night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill that brasen wall they up doe reare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Merlin had in Magick more insight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then ever him before, or after, living wight:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For he by wordes could call out of the sky</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both Sunne and Moone, and make them him obav;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Land to sea, and sea to maineland dry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And darksom night he eke could turne to day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Huge hostes of men he could alone dismay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hostes of men of meanest thinges could frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When so him list his enimies to fray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to this day, for terror of his fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The feends do quake when any him to them does name.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, sooth, men say that he was not the sonne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of mortall Syre or other living wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wondrously begotten, and begonne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By false illusion of a guilefull Spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On a faire Lady Nonne, that whilome hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Matilda, daughter to Pubidius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who was the lord of Mathraval by right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And coosen unto king Ambrosius;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence he indued was with skill so merveilous.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They, here arriving, staid awhile without,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne durst adventure rashly in to wend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But of their first intent gan make new dout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For dread of daunger which it might portend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill the hardy Mayd (with love to frend)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First entering, the dreadfull Mage there fownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deepe busied bout worke of wondrous end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And writing straunge characters in the grownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With which the stubborne feendes he to his service bownd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He nought was moved at their entraunce bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For of their comming well he wist afore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet list them bid their busmesse to unfold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if ought in this world in secrete store</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were from him hidden, or unknowne of yore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Glauce thus: "Let not it thee offend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That we thus rashly through thy darksom dore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unwares have prest; for either fatall end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or other mightie cause, us two did hither send."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He bad tell on; And then she thus began.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Now have three Moones with borrowd brothers light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrise shined faire, and thrise seemd dim and wan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith a sore evill, which this virgin bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tormenteth and doth plonge in dolefull plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First rooting tooke; but what thing it mote bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or whence it sprong, I can not read aright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But this I read, that, but if remedee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou her afford, full shortly I her dead shall see."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith th' Enchaunter softly gan to smyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At her smooth speeches, weeting inly well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she to him dissembled womanish guyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to her said: "Beldame, by that ye tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More neede of leach-crafte hath your Damozell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then of my skill: who helpe may have elsewhere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In vaine seekes wonders out of Magick spell."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th'old woman wox half blanck those wordes to heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet was loth to let her purpose plaine appeare;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And to him said: "Yf any leaches skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or other learned meanes, could have redrest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This my deare daughters deepe engraffed ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Certes I should be loth thee to molest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But this sad evill, which doth her infest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth course of naturall cause farre exceed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And housed is within her hollow brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That either seemes some cursed witches deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or evill spright, that in her doth such torment breed."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The wisard could no lenger beare her bord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, brusting forth in laughter, to her sayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Glauce, what needes this colourable word</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To cloke the cause that hath it selfe bewrayd?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ye, fayre Britomartis, thus arayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More hidden are then Sunne in cloudy vele;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom thy good fortune, having fate obayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath hither brought for succour to appele;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which the powres to thee are pleased to revele."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The doubtfull Mayd, seeing her selfe descryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was all abasht, and her pure yvory</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into a cleare Carnation suddeine dyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As fayre Aurora, rysing hastily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth by her blushing tell that she did lye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All night in old Tithonus frozen bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof she seemes ashamed inwardly:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But her olde Nourse was nought dishartened,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But vauntage made of that which Merlin had ared;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And sayd; "Sith then thou knowest all our griefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(For what doest not thou knowe?) of grace I pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pitty our playnt, and yield us meet reliefe."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that the Prophet still awhile did stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then his spirite thus gan foorth display:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Most noble Virgin, that by fatall lore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hast learn'd to love, let no whit thee dismay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hard beginne that meetes thee in the dore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with sharpe fits thy tender hart oppresseth sore:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"For so must all things excellent begin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke enrooted deepe must be that Tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose big embodied braunches shall not lin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till they to hevens hight forth stretched bee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For from thy wombe a famous Progenee J</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall spring out of the auncient Trojan blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which shall revive the sleeping memoree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of those same antique Peres, the hevens brood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which Greeke and Asian rivers stayned with their blood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Renowmed kings, and sacred Emperours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy fruitfull Ofspring, shall from thee descend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Brave Captaines, and most mighty warriours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shall their conquests through all lands extend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And their decayed kingdomes shall amend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The feeble Britons, broken with long warre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They shall upreare, and mightily defend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against their forren foe that commes from farre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till universall peace compound all civill Jarre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"It was not, Britomart, thy wandring eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Glauncing unwares in charmed looking glas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the streight course of hevenly destiny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Led with eternall providence, that has</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Guyded thy glaunce, to bring his will to pas:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne is thy fate, ne is thy fortune ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To love the prowest knight that ever was.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore submit thy wayes unto his will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And doe by all dew meanes thy destiny fulfill."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But read," (saide Glauce) "thou Magitian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What meanes shall she out seeke, or what waies take?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How shall she know, how shall she finde the man?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or what needes her to toyle, sith fates can make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Way for themselves their purpose to pertake?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Merlin thus: "Indeede the fates are firme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And may not shrinck, though all the world do shake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet ought mens good endevours them confirme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And guyde the heavenly causes to their constant terme.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"The man, whom heavens have ordaynd to bee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The spouse of Britomart, is. Arthegall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He wonneth in the land of Fayeree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet is no Fary borne, ne sib at all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Elfes, but sprong of seed terrestriall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And whylome by false Faries stolne away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whyles yet in infant cradle he did crall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne other to himselfe is knowne this day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that he by an Elfe was gotten of a Fay:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But sooth he is the sonne of Gorlois,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And brother unto Cador, Cornish king;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for his warlike feates renowmed is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From where the day out of the sea doth spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill the closure of the Evening:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From thence him, firmely bound with faithfull band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To this his native soyje thou backe shalt bring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strongly to ayde his countrey to withstand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The powre of forreine Paynims which invade thy land.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Great ayd thereto his mighty puissaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dreaded name shall give in that sad day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where also proofe of thy prow valiaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou then shalt make, t'increase thy lover's pray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long time ye both in armes shall beare great sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till thy wombes burden thee from them do call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his last fate him from thee take away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Too rathe cut off by practise criminall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of secrete foes, that him shall make in mischiefe fall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"With thee yet shall he leave, for memory</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his late puissaunce, his ymage dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That living him in all activity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To thee shall represent. He, from the head</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his coosen Constantius, without dread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall take the crowne that was his fathers right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therewith crowne himselfe in th'others stead:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then shall he issew forth with dreadfull might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against his Saxon foes in bloody field to fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Like as a Lyon that in drowsie cave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath long time slept, himselfe so shall he shake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And comming forth shall spred his banner brave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over the troubled South, that it shall make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The warlike Mertians for feare to quake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrise shall he fight with them, and twise shall win;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the third time shall fayre accordaunce make:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, if he then with viclorie can lin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He shall his dayes with peace bring to his earthly In.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"His sonne, hight Vortipore, shall him succeede</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In kingdome, but not in felicity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet shall he long time warre with happy speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with great honour many batteills try;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But at the last to th' importunity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of froward fortune shall be forst to yield:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But his sonne Malgo shall full mightily</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Avenge his fathers losse with speare and shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his proud foes discomfit in victorious field.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Behold the man! and tell me, Britomart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If ay more goodly creature thou didst see?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How like a Gyaunt in each manly part</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beares he himselfe with portly majestee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That one of th'old Heroes seemes to bee!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He the six Islands, comprovinciall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In auncient times unto great Britainee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall to the same reduce, and to him call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their sondry kings to do their homage severall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"All which his sonne Careticus awhile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall well defend, and Saxons powre suppresse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill a straunger king, from unknowne soyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arriving, him with multitude oppresse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great Gormond, having with huge mightinesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ireland subdewd, and therein fixt his throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like a swift Otter, fell through emptinesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall overswim the sea, with many one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his Norveyses, to assist the Britons fone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"He in his furie all shall overronne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And holy Church with faithlesse handes deface,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That thy sad people, utterly fordonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall to the utmost mountaines fly apace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was never so great waste in any place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor so fowle outrage doen by living men;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all thy Citties they shall sacke and race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the greene grasse that groweth they shall bren,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That even the wilde beast shall dy in starved den.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Whiles thus thy Britons doe in languour pine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proud Etheldred shall from the North arise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Serving th'ambitious will of Augustine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, passing Dee, with hardy enterprise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall backe repulse the valiaunt Brockwell twise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Bangor with massacred Martyrs fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the third time shall rew his foolhardise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Cadwan, pittying his peoples ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall stoutly him defeat, and thousand Saxons kill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But after him, Cadwallin mightily</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On his sonne Edwin all those wrongs shall wreake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne shall availe the wicked sorcery</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of false Pellite his purposes to breake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But him shall slay, and on a gallowes bleak</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall give th'enchaunter his unhappy hire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then shall the Britons, late dismayd and weake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From their long vassalage gin to respire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on their Paynim foes avenge their ranckled ire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ne shall he yet his wrath so mitigate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till both the sonnes of Edwin he have slayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Offricke and Osricke, twinnes unfortunate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both slaine in battaile upon Layburne playne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Together with the king of Louthiane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hight Adin, and the king of Orkeny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both joynt partakers of their fatall payne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Penda, fearefull of like desteny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall yield him selfe his liegeman, and sweare fealty.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Him shall he make his fatall Instrument</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T'afflict the other Saxons unsubdewd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He marching forth with fury insolent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the good king Oswald, who indewd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With heavenly powre, and by Angels reskewd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Al holding crosses in their hands on hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall him defeate withouten blood imbrewd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which that field, for endlesse memory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall Hevenfield be cald to all posterity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Whereat Cadwallin wroth shall forth issew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And an huge hoste into Northumber lead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which he godly Oswald shall subdew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And crowne with martiredome his sacred head:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose brother Oswin, daunted with like dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With price of silver shall his kingdome buy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Penda, seeking him adowne to tread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall tread adowne, and doe him fowly dye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But shall with guifts his Lord Cadwallin pacify.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Then shall Cadwallin die; and then the raine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Britons eke with him attonce shall dye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne shall the good Cadwallader, with paine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or powre, be hable it to remedy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When the full time, prefixt by destiny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shal be expird of Britons regiment:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For heven it selfe shall their successe envy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And them with plagues and murrins pestilent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Consume, till all their warlike puissaunce be spent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Yet after all these sorrowes, and huge hills</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of dying people, during eight yeares space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cadwallader, not yielding to his ills,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From Armoricke, where long in wretched cace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He liv'd, retourning to his native place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shal be by vision staide from his intent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For th' heavens have decreed to displace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Britons for their sinnes dew punishment</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the Saxons over-give their government.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Then woe, and woe, and everlasting woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be to the Briton babe that shal be borne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To live in thraldome of his fathers foe!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Late king, now captive; late lord, now forlorne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The worlds reproch; the cruell victors scorne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Banisht from princely bowre to wastefull wood!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O! who shal helpe me to lament and mourne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The royall seed, the antique Trojan blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose empire lenger here then ever any stood?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Damzell was full deepe empassioned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both for his griefe, and for her peoples sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose future woes so plaine he fashioned;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, sighing sore, at length him thus bespake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ah! but will hevens fury never slake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor vengeaunce huge relent it selfe at last?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will not long misery late mercy make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But shall their name for ever be defaste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And quite from off the earth their memory be raste?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Nay but the terme" (sayd he) "is limited,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in this thraldome Britons shall abide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the just revolution measured</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they as Straungers shal be notifide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For twise fowre hundreth yeares shalbe supplide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere they to former rule restor'd shal bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And their importune fates all satisfide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, during this their most obscuritee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their beames shall ofte breake forth, that men them faire may see.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"For Rhodoricke, whose surname shal be Great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall of him selfe a brave ensample shew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Saxon kinges his friendship shall intreat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Howell Dha shall goodly well indew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The salvage minds with skill of just and trew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Griflyth Conan also shall upreare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His dreaded head, and the old sparkes renew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of native corage, that his foes shall feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Least back againe the kingdom he from them should beare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ne shall the Saxons selves all peaceably</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enjoy the crowne, which they from Britons wonne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First ill, and after ruled wickedly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, ere two hundred yeares be full outronne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There shall a Raven, far from rising Sunne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his wide wings upon them fiercely fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bid his faithlesse chickens overronne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fruitfull plaines, and with fell cruelty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In their avenge tread downe the victors surquedry.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Yet shall a third both these and thine subdew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There shall a Lion from the sea-bord wood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Neustria come roring, with a crew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of hungry whelpes, his battailous bold brood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose clawes were newly dipt in cruddy blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from the Daniske Tyrants head shall rend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th'usurped crowne, as if that he were wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the spoile of the countrey conquered</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Emongst his young ones shall divide with bountyhed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Tho, when the terme is full accomplishid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There shall a sparke of fire, which hath long-while</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bene in his ashes raked up and hid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bee freshly kindled in the fruitfull</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Mona, where it lurked in exile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which shall breake forth into bright burning flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And reach into the house that beares the stile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of roiall majesty and soveraine name:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So shall the Briton blood their crowne agayn reclame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Thenceforth eternall union shall be made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Betweene the nations different afore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sacred Peace shall lovingly persuade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The warlike minds to learne her goodly lore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And civile armes to exercise no more:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then shall a royall Virgin raine, which shall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stretch her white rod over the Belgicke shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the great Castle smite so sore with all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it shall make him shake, and shortly learn to fall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But yet the end is not." There Merlin stayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As overcomen of the spirites powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or other ghastly spectacle dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That secretly he saw, yet note discoure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which suddein fitt, and halfe extatick stoure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When the two fearefull wemen saw, they grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Greatly confused in behaveoure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last, the fury past, to former hew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hee turnd againe, and chearfull looks as earst did shew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then, when them selves they well instructed had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all that needed them to be inquird,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They both, conceiving hope of comfort glad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With lighter hearts unto their home retird;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where they in secret counsell close conspird,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How to effect so hard an enterprize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to possesse the purpose they desird:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now this, now that, twixt them they did devize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And diverse plots did frame to maske in strange disguise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last the Nourse in her foolhardy wit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Conceiv'd a bold devise, and thus bespake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Daughter, I deeme that counsel aye most fit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of the time doth dew advauntage take.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye see that good king Uther now doth make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strong warre upon the Paynim brethren, hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Octa and Oza, whome hee lately brake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beside Cayr Verolame in victorious fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That now all Britany doth burne in armes bright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"That, therefore, nought our passage may empeach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let us in feigned armes our selves disguize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And our weake hands (need makes good schollers) teach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dreadful speare and shield to exercize:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne certes, daughter, that same warlike wize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I weene, would you misseeme; for ye beene tall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And large of limbe t'atchieve an hard emprize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought ye want but skil, which practize small</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wil bring, and shortly make you a mayd Martiall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And, sooth, it ought your corage much inflame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To heare so often, in that royall hous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whence, to none inferior, ye came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bards tell of many wemen valorous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which have full many feats adventurous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Performd, in paragone of proudest men:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bold Bunduca, whose victorious</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Exployts made Rome to quake; stout Guendolen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Renowmed Martia; and redoubted Emmilen.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And, that which more then all the rest may sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Late dayes ensample, which these eyes beheld:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the last field before Menevia,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Uther with those forrein Pagans held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I saw a Saxon Virgin, the which feld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great Ulfin thrise upon the bloody playne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, had not Carados her hand withheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From rash revenge, she had him surely slayne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet Carados himselfe from her escapt with payne."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ah! read," (quoth Britomart) "how is she hight?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Fayre Angela" (quoth she) "men do her call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No whit lesse fayre then terrible in fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She hath the leading of a Martiall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mightie people, dreaded more then all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other Saxons, which doe, for her sake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And love, themselves of her name <i>Angles</i> call.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore, faire Infant, her ensample make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto thy selfe, and equall corage to thee take."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her harty wordes so dcepe into the mynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the yong Damzell sunke, that great desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of warlike armes in her forthwith they tynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And generous stout courage did inspyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she resolv'd, unweeting to her Syre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Advent'rous knighthood on her selfe to don;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And counseld with her Nourse her Maides attyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To turne into a massy habergeon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bad her all things put in readinesse anon.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Th'old woman nought that needed did omit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all thinges did conveniently purvay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It fortuned (so time their turne did fitt)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A band of Britons, ryding on forray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Few dayes before, had gotten a great pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Saxon goods; emongst the which was scene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A goodly Armour, and full rich aray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which long'd to Angela, the Saxon Queene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All fretted round with gold, and goodly wel beseene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The same, with all the other ornaments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">King Ryence caused to be hanged hy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his chiefe Church, for endlesse moniments</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his successe and gladfull victory:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which her selfe avising readily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In th'evening late old Glauce thither led</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Britomart, and, that same Armory</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Downe taking, her therein appareled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well as she might, and with brave bauldrick garnished,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Beside those armes there stood a mightie speare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Bladud made by Magick art of yore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And usd the same in batteill aye to beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith which it had beene here preserv'd in store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For his great virtues proved long afore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For never wight so fast in sell could sit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But him perforce unto the ground it bore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both speare she tooke and shield which hong by it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both speare and shield of great powre, for her purpose fit.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus when she had the virgin all arayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another harnesse which did hang thereby</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About her selfe she dight, that the yong Mayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She might in equall armes accompany,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as her Squyre attend her carefully.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho to their ready Steedes they clombe full light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through back waies, that none might them espy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Covered with secret cloud of silent night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Themselves they forth convaid, and passed forward right.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne rested they, till that to Faery lond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They came, as Merlin them directed late:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where, meeting with this Redcrosse Knight, she fond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of diverse thinges discourses to dilate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But most of Arthegall and his estate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last their wayes so fell, that they mote part:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then each to other, well affectionate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Friendship professed with unfained hart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Redcrosse Knight diverst, but forth rode Britomart.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-4" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Bold Marinell of Britomart</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Is throwne in the Rich strond:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Faire Florimell of Arthur is</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Long follwed, but not fond.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Where is the Antique glory now become,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That whylome wont in wemen to appeare?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where be the brave atchievements doen by some?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where be the battels, where the shield and speare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the conquests which them high did reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That matter made for famous Poets verse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And boastfull men so oft abasht to heare?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beene they all dead, and laide in dolefull herse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or doen they onely sleepe, and shall againe reverse r</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>If they be dead, then woe is me therefore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if they sleepe, O let them soone awake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all too long I burne with envy sore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To heare the warlike feates, which Homere spake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of bold Penthesilee, which made a lake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Greekish blood so oft in Trojan plaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when I reade, how stout Debora strake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proud Sisera, and how Camill' hath slaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The huge Orsilochus, I swell with great disdaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet these, and all that els had puissaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cannot with noble Britomart compare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As well for glorie of great valiaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As for pure chastitee and vertue rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all her goodly deedes doe well declare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well worthie stock, from which the branches sprong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in late yeares so faire a blossome bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As thee, O Queene! the matter of my song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose lignage from this Lady I derive along.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who when, through speaches with the Redcrosse Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She learned had th'estate of Arthegall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in each point her selfe informd aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A friendly league of love perpetuall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She with him bound, and Conge tooke withall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then he forth on his journey did proceede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke adventures which mote him befall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And win him worship through his warlike deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which alwaies of his paines he made the chiefest meed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Britomart kept on her former course,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever dofte her armes, but all the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Grew pensive through that amarous discourse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which the Redcrosse knight did earst display</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her lovers shape, and chevalrous aray:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A thousand thoughts she fashiond in her mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in her feigning fancie did pourtray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him such as fittest she for love could find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wise, warlike, personable, courteous, and kind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With such selfe-pleasing thoughts her wound she fed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thought so to beguile her grievous smart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But so her smart was much more grievous bred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the deepe wound more deep engord her hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nought but death her dolour mote depart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So forth she rode, without repose or rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Searching all lands and each remotest part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Following the guydance of her blinded guest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till that to the sea-coast at length she her addrest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There she alighted from her light-foot beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sitting downe upon the rocky shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Badd her old Squyre unlace her lofty creast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho having vewd awhile the surges hore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That gainst the craggy clifts did loudly rore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in their raging surquedry disdaynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the fast earth affronted them so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And their devouring covetize restraynd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereat she sighed deepe, and after thus complaynd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Huge sea of sorrow and tempestuous griefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein my feeble barke is tossed long</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far from the hoped haven of reliefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why doe thy cruel bi Howes beat so strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thy moyst mountaines each on others throng,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Threatning to swallow up my fearefull lyfe?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O! doe thy cruell wrath and spightfull wrong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At length allay, and stint thy stormy strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which in thy troubled bowels raignes and rageth ryfc.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"For els my feeble vessell, crazd and crackt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through thy strong buffets and outrageous blowes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cannot endure, but needes it must be wrackt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On the rough rocks, or on the sandy shallowes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles that love it steres, and fortune rowes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Love, my lewd Pilott, hath a restlesse minde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fortune, Boteswaine, no assurance knowes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But saile withouten starres gainst tyde and winde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How can they other doe, sith both are bold and blinde?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Thou God of windes, that raignest in the seas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That raignest also in the Continent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last blow up some gentle gale of ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which may bring my ship, ere it be rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the gladsome port of her intent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, when I shall my selfe in safety see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A table, for eternall moniment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of thy great grace and my great jeopardee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great Neptune, I avow to hallow unto thee!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then sighing softly sore, and inly deepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She shut up all her plaint in privy griefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For her great courage would not let her weepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that old Glauce gan with sharpe repriefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her to restraine, and give her good reliefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through hope of those, which Merlin had her told</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should of her name and nation be chiefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fetch their being from the sacred mould</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of her immortall womb, to be in heaven enrold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus as she her recomforted, she spyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where far away one, all in armour bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hasty gallop towards her did ryde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her dolour soone she ceast, and on her dight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her Helmet, to her Courser mounting light:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her former sorrow into suddein wrath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both coosen passions of distroubled spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Converting, forth she beates the dusty path:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love and despight attonce her courage kindled hath.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As, when a foggy mist hath overcast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The face of heven, and the cleare ayre engroste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The world in darkenes dwels; till that at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The watry Southwinde, from the seabord coste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upblowing, doth disperse the vapour lo'ste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And poures it selfe forth in a stormy showre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So the fayre Britomart, having disclo'ste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her clowdy care into a wrathfull stowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mist of griefe dissolv'd did into vengeance powre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones, her goodly shield addressing fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That mortall speare she in her hand did take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto battaill did her selfe prepayre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The knight, approching, sternely her bespake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Sir knight, that doest thy voyage rashly make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By this forbidden way in my despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne doest by others death ensample take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I read thee soone retyre, whiles thou hast might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Least afterwards it be too late to take thy flight."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ythrild with deepe disdaine of his proud threat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She shortly thus: "Fly they, that need to fly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wordes fearen babes. I meane not thee entreat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To passe, but maugre thee will passe or dy."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne lenger stayd for th'other to reply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with sharpe speare the rest made dearly knowne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strongly the straunge knight ran, and sturdily</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strooke her full on the brest, that made her downe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Decline her head, and touch her crouper with her crown.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But she againe him in the shield did smite</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With so fierce furie and great puissaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, through his three-square scuchin percing quite</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through his mayled hauberque, by mischaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wicked steele through his left side did glaunce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him so transfixed she before her bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beyond his croupe, the length of all her launce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till, sadly soucing on the sandy shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He tombled on an heape, and wallowd in his gore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like as the sacred Oxe that carelesse stands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With gilden homes and flowry girlonds crownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proud of his dying honor and deare bandes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles th'altars fume with frankincense arownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All suddeinly, with mortall stroke astownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth groveling fall, and with his streaming gore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Distaines the pillours and the holy grownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the faire flowres that decked him afore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So fell proud Marinell upon the pretious shore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The martiall Mayd stayd not him to lament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But forward rode, and kept her ready way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Along the strond; which, as she over-went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She saw bestrewed all with rich aray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of pearles and pretious stones of great assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the gravell mixt with golden owre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat she wondred much, but would not stay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For gold, or perles, or pretious stones, an howre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But them despised all; for all was in her powre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whiles thus he lay in deadly stonishment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tydings hereof came to his mothers eare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mother was the blacke-browd Cymoent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The daughter of great Nereus, which did beare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This warlike sonne unto an earthly peare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The famous Dumarin; who, on a day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Finding the Nymph asleepe in secret wheare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he by chaunce did wander that same way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was taken with her love, and by her closely lay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There he this knight of her begot, whom borne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She, of his father, Marinell did name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in a rocky cave, as wight forlorne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long time she fostred up, till he became</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A mighty man at armes, and mickle fame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did get through great adventures by him donne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For never man he suffred by that same</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rich strond to travell, whereas he did wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that he must do battail with the Sea-nymphes sonne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>An hundred knights of honorable name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He had subdew'd, and them his vassals made;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That through all Faerie lond his noble fame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now blazed was, and feare did all invade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none durst passen through that perilous glade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to advaunce his name and glory more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her Sea-god syre she dearely did perswade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T'endow her sonne with threasure and rich store</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bove all the sonnes that were of earthly wombes ybore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The God did graunt his daughters deare demaund,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To doen his Nephew in all riches flow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones his heaped waves he did commaund</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of their hollow bosome forth to throw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All the huge threasure, which the sea below</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had in his greedy gulfe devoured deepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him enriched through the overthrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wreckes of many wretches, which did weepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And often wayle their wealth, which he from them did keepe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Shortly upon that shore there heaped was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Exceeding riches and all pretious things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The spoyle of all the world; that it did pas</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wealth of th' East, and pompe of Persian kings:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gold, amber, yvorie, perles, owches, rings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all that els was pretious and deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sea unto him voluntary brings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shortly he a great Lord did appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As was in all the lond of Faery, or else wheare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereto he was a doughty dreaded knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tryde often to the scath of many Deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none in equall armes him matchen might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which his mother seeing gan to feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least his too haughtie hardines might reare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some hard mishap in hazard of his life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forthy she oft him counseld to forbeare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bloody batteill and to stirre up strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But after all his warre to rest his wearie knife.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, for his more assuraunce, she inquir'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One day of Proteus by his mighty spell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(For Proteus was with prophecy inspir'd)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her deare sonnes destiny to her to tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the sad end of her sweet Marinell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, through foresight of his eternall skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bad her from womankind to keepe him well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For of a woman he should have much ill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A virgin straunge and stout him should dismay or kill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Forthy she gave him warning every day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The love of women not to entertaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A lesson too too hard for living clay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From love in course of nature to refraine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet he his mothers lore did well retaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever from fay re Ladies love did fly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet many Ladies fayre did oft complaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they for love of him would algates dy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dy, who so list for him, he was loves enimy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But ah! who can deceive his destiny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or weene by warning to avoyd his fate?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, when he sleepes in most security</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And safest seemes, him soonest doth amate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And findeth dew effect or soone or late;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So feeble is the powre of fleshly arme.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mother bad him wemens love to hate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she of womans force did feare no harme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, weening to have arm'd him, she did quite disarme.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This was that woman, this that deadly wownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Proteus prophecide should him dismay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which his mother vainely did expownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be hart-wownding love, which should assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bring her sonne unto his last decay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So tide be the termes of mortall state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And full of subtile sophismes, which do play</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With double senses, and with false debate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>T'approve the unknowen purpose of eternall fate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Too trew the famous Marinell it fownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, through late triall, on that wealthy Strond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Inglorious now lies in sencelesse swownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through heavy stroke of Britomartis hond.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when his mother deare did understond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heavy tydings heard, whereas she playd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst her watry sisters by a pond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gathering sweete daffadillyes, to have made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gay girlonds from the Sun their forheads faire to shade;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftesoones both flowres and girlonds far away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee flong, and her faire deawy lockes yrent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sorrow huge she turnd her former play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gamesom merth to grievous dreriment:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee threw her selfe downe on the Continent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne word did speake, but lay as in a swowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles all her sisters did for her lament</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With yelling outcries, and with shrieking sowne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every one did teare her girlond from her crowne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as shee up out of her deadly fitt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arose, shee bad her charett to be brought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all her sisters that with her did sitt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bad eke attonce their charetts to be sought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, full of bitter griefe and pensife thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She to her wagon clombe; clombe all the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And forth together went with sorow fraught.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The waves, obedient to theyr beheast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Them yielded ready passage, and their rage surceast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Great Neptune stoode amazed at their sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles on his broad rownd backe they softly slid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke him selfe mournd at their mournful plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet wist not what their wailing ment; yet did,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For great compassion of their sorow, bid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mighty waters to them buxome bee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftesoones the roaring billowes still abid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the griesly Monsters of the See</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood gaping at their gate, and wondred them to see.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A teme of Dolphins raunged in aray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drew the smooth charett of sad Cymoent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They were all taught by Triton to obay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the long raynes at her commaundement:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As swifte as swallowes on the waves they went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That their brode flaggy finnes no fome did reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne bubling rowndell they behinde them sent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rest, of other fishes drawen weare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which with their finny oars the swelling sea did sheare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as they bene arriv'd upon the brim</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the Rich Strond, their charets they forlore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And let their temed fishes softly swim</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Along the margent of the fomy shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least they their finnes should bruze, and surbate sore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their tender feete upon the stony grownd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And comming to the place, where all in gore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cruddy blood enwallowed they fownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lucklesse Marinell lying in deadly swownd,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His mother swowned thrise, and the third time</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could scarce recovered bee out of her paine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had she not beene devoide of mortall slime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee should not then have bene relyv'd againe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, soone as life recovered had the raine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee made so piteous mone and deare wayment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the hard rocks could scarse from tears refraine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all her sister Nymphes with one consent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Supplide her sobbing breaches with sad complement.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Deare image of my selfe," (she sayd) "that is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wretched sonne of wretched mother borne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is this thine high advauncement? O! is this</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">TV immortall name, with which thee, yet unborne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy Grandsire Nereus promist to adorne?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now lyest thou of life and honor refte;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now lyest thou a lumpe of earth forlorne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne of thy late life memory is lefte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne can thy irrevocable desteny bee wefte.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Fond Proteus, father of false prophecis!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And they more fond that credit to thee give!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not this the worke of womans hand ywis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That so deepe wound through these deare members drive.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I feared love; but they that love doe live,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But they that dye doe nether love nor hate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nath'lesse to thee thy folly I forgive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to my selfe, and to accursed fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The guilt I doe ascribe: deare wisedom bought too late!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"O! what availes it of immortall seed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To beene ybredd and never borne to dye?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Farre better I it deeme to die with speed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then waste in woe and waylfull miserye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who dyes, the utmost dolor doth abye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But who that lives is lefte to waile his losse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So life is losse, and death felicity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sad life worse then glad death; and greater crosse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see frends grave, then dead the grave self to engrosse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But if the heavens did his dayes envie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And my short blis maligne, yet mote they will</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus much afford me, ere that he did die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the dim eies of my deare Marinell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I mote that close, and him bed farewell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith other offices for mother meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They would nor graunt—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, maulgre them, farewell, my sweetest sweet!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Farewell, my sweetest sonne, sith we no more shall meet!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus when they all had sorowed their fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They softly gan to search his griesly wownd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, that they might him handle more at will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They him disarmd; and, spredding on the grownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their watchet mantles fridgd with silver rownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They softly wipt away the gelly blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From th'orifice; which having well upbownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They pourd in soveraine balme and Nectar good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good both for erthly med'cine and for hevenly food.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho when the lilly handed liagore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(This Liagore whilome had learned skill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In leaches craft, by great Apolloes lore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith her whilome upon high Pindus hill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He loved, and at last her wombe did fill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hevenly seed, whereof wise Paeon sprong)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did feele his pulse, she knew there staied still</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some litle life his feeble sprites emong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which to his mother told, despeire she from her flong.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho, up him taking in their tender hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They easely unto her charett beare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her teme at her commaundement quiet stands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles they the corse into her wagon reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strowe with flowres the lamentable beare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then all the rest into their coches clim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through the brackish waves their passage sheare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon great Neptunes necke they softly swim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to her watry chamber swiftly carry him.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Deepe in the bottome of the sea her bowre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is built of hollow billowes heaped hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to thicke clouds that threat a stormy showre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And vauted all within, like to the Skye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which the Gods doe dwell eternally;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There they him laide in easy couch well dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sent in haste for Tryphon, to apply</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Salves to his wounds, and medicines of might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Tryphon of sea gods the soveraine leach is hight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The whiles the Nymphes sit all about him rownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lamenting his mishap and heavy plight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ofte his mother, vewing his wide wownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cursed the hand that did so deadly smight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her dearest sonne, her dearest harts delight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But none of all those curses overtooke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The warlike Maid, th'ensample of that might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But fairely well shee thryv'd, and well did brooke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her noble deeds, ne her right course for ought forsooke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet did false Archimagg-her still pursew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bring to passe his mischievous intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now that he had her singled from the crew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of courteous knights, the Prince and Faery 'gent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom late in chace of beauty excellent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee lefte, pursewing that same foster strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whose fowle outrage they impatient,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And full of firy zele, him followed long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To reskew her from shame, and to revenge her wrong.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Through thick and thin, through mountains and through playns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those two great champions did attonce pursew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fearefull damzell with incessant payns;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who from them fled, as light-foot hare from vew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of hunter swifte and sent of howndes trew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last they came unto a double way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where, doubtfull which to take, her to reskew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Themselves they did dispart, each to assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether more happy were to win so goodly pray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Timias, the Princes gentle Squyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Ladies love unto his Lord forlent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with proud envy and indignant yre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After that wicked foster fiercely went:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So beene they three three sondry wayes ybent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But fayrest fortune to the Prince befell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose chaunce it was, that soone he did repent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To take that way in which that Damozell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was fledd afore, airraid of him as feend of hell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last of her far off he gained vew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan he freshly pricke his fomy steed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever as he nigher to her drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So evermore he did increase his speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of each turning still kept wary heed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alowd to her he oftentimes did call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To doe away vaine doubt and needlesse dreed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full myld to her he spake, and oft let fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many meeke wordes to stay and comfort her withall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But nothing might relent her hasty flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So deepe the deadly feare of that foule swaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was earst impressed in her gentle spright.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as a fearefull Dove, which through the raine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the wide ayre her way does cut amaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having farre off espyde a Tassell gent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which after her his nimble winges doth straine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doubleth her hast for feare to bee for-hent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with her pineons cleaves the liquid firmament.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With no lesse hast, and eke with no lesse dreed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That fearefull Ladie fledd from him, that ment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To her no evill thought nor evill deed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet former feare of being fowly shent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Carried her forward with her first intent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And though, oft looking backward, well she vewde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her selfe freed from that foster insolent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that it was a knight which now her sewde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet she no lesse the knight feard then that villein rude.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His uncouth shield and straunge armes her dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose like in Faery lond were seldom scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That fast she from him fledd, no lesse afrayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then of wilde beastes if she had chased beene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet he her followd still with corage keene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So long, that now the golden Hesperus</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was mounted high in top of heaven sheene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And warnd his other brethren joyeous</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To light their blessed lamps in Joves eternall hous.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All suddeinly dim wox the dampish ayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And griesly shadowes covered heaven bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That now with thousand starres was decked fayre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when the Prince beheld, a lothfull sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that perforce, for want of lenger light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He mote surceasse his suit, and lose the hope</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his long labour, he gan fowly wyte</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His wicked fortune that had turnd aslope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cursed night that reft from him so goodly scope.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho, when her wayes he could no more descry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to and fro at disaventure strayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as a ship, whose Lodestar suddeinly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Covered with cloudes her Pilott hath dismayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His wearisome pursuit perforce he stayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from his loftie steed dismounting low</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did let him forage. Downe himselfe he layd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the grassy ground to sleepe a throw:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cold earth was his couch, the hard steele his pillow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But gentle Sleepe envyde him any rest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In stead thereof sad sorow and disdaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his hard hap did vexe his noble brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thousand Fancies bett his ydle brayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With their light wings, the sights of semblants vaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oft did he wish that Lady faire mote bee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His Faery Queene, for whom he did complaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that his Faery Queene were such as shee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ever hasty Night be blamed bitterlie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Night! thou foule Mother of annoyaunce sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sister of heavie death, and nourse of woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which wast begot in heaven, but for thy bad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And brutish shape thrust downe to hell below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where, by the grim floud of Cocytus slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy dwelling is in Herebus black hous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Black Herebus, thy husband, is the foe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the Gods,) where thou ungratious</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Halfe of thy dayes doest lead in horrour hideous.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"What had th'eternall Maker need of thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The world in his continuall course to keepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That doest all thinges deface, ne lettest see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The beautie of his worke? Indeed, in sleepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The slouthfull body that doth love to steepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His lustlesse limbes, and drowne his baser mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth praise thee oft, and oft from Stygian deepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Calles thee his goddesse, in his errour blind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And great Dame Natures handmaide chearing every kind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But well I wote, that to an heavy hart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou art the roote and nourse of bitter cares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Breeder of new, renewer of old smarts:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Instead of rest thou lendest rayling teares;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Instead of sleepe thou sendest troublous feares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dreadfull visions, in the which alive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dreary image of sad death appeares:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So from the wearie spirit thou doest drive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Desired rest, and men of happinesse deprive.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Under thy mantle black there hidden lye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Light-shonning thefte, and traiterous intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abhorred bloodshed, and vile felony,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shamefull deceipt, and daunger imminent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fowle horror, and eke hellish dreriment:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All these, I wote, in thy protection bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And light doe shonne for feare of being shent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For light ylike is loth'd of them and thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all that lewdnesse love doe hate the light to see.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"For day discovers all dishonest wayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sheweth each thing as it is in deed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The prayses of high God he faire displayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his large bountie rightly doth areed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dayes dearest children be the blessed seed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which darknesse shall subdue and heaven win:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Truth is his daughter; he her first did breed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most sacred virgin without spot of sinne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our life is day, but death with darknesse doth begin.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"O! when will day then turne to me againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bring with him his long expected light?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O Titan! hast to reare thy joyous waine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Speed thee to spred abroad thy beames bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chace away this too long lingring night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Chace her away, from whence she came, to hell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She, she it is, that hath me done despight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There let her with the damned spirits dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yield her rowme to day that can it governe well."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus did the Prince that wearie night outweare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In restlesse anguish and unquiet paine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And earely, ere the morrow did upreare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His deawy head out of the Ocean maine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He up arose, as halfe in great disdaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And clombe unto his steed. So forth he went</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With heavy look and lumpish pace, that plaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In him bewraid great grudge and maltalent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His steed eke seemd t'apply his steps to his intent.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-5" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Prince Arthur heares of Florimell:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Three fosters Timias wounds;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Belphebe finds him alost dead.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And reareth out of sownd.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Wonder it is to see, in diverse minds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How diversly love doth his pageants play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shewes his powre in variable kinds:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The baser wit, whose idle thoughts alway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are wont to cleave unto the lowly clay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It stirreth up to sensuall desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in lewd slouth to wast his carelesse day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in brave sprite it kindles goodly fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That to all high desert and honour doth aspire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne suffereth it uncomely idlenesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his free thought to build her sluggish nest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne suffereth it thought of ungentlenesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ever to creepe into his noble brest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to the highest and the worthiest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">1 Lifteth it up that els would lowly fall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It lettes not fall, it lettes it not to rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It lettes not scarse this Prince to breath at all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to his first poursuit him forward still doth call.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who long time wandred through the forest wyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To fmde some issue thence, till that at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He met a Dwarfe, that seemed terrifyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With some late perill which he hardly past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or other accident, which him aghast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whom he asked, whence he lately came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And whither now he travelled so fast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For sore he swat, and, running through that same</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thicke forest, was bescracht, and both his feet nigh lame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Panting for breath, and almost out of hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Dwarfe him answerd; "Sir, ill mote I stay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tell the same: I lately did depart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From Faery court, where I have many a day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Served a gentle Lady of great sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And high accompt through out all Elfin land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who lately left the same, and tooke this way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her now I seeke; and if ye understand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which way she fared hath, good Sir, tell out of hand."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"What mister wight," (saide he) "and how arayd?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Royally clad" (quoth he) "in cloth of gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As meetest may beseeme a noble mayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her faire lockes in rich circlet be enrold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A fayrer wight did never Sunne behold?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on a Palfrey rydes more white then snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet she her selfe is whiter manifold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The surest signe, whereby ye may her know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is that she is the fairest wight alive, I trow."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Now certes, swaine," (saide he) "such one, I weene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fast flying through this forest from her fo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A foule ill-favoured foster, I have scene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her selfe, well as I might, I reskewd tho,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But could not stay, so fast she did foregoe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Carried away with wings of speedy feare."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ah, dearest God!" (quoth he) "that is great woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wondrous ruth to all that shall it heare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But can ye read, Sir, how I may her finde, or where?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Perdy, me lever were to weeten that,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Said he) "then ransome of the richest knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or all the good that ever yet I gat:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But froward fortune, and too forward Night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such happinesse did, maulgre, to me spight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fro me reft both life and light attone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, Dwarfe, aread what is that Lady bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That through this forrest wandreth thus alone?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For of her errour straunge I have great ruth and mone."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"That Lady is," (quoth he) "where so she bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bountiest virgin and most debonaire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ever living eye, I weene, did see.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lives none this day that may with her compare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In stedfast chastitie and vertue rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The goodly ornaments of beautie bright;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And is ycleped Florimell the faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Florimell belov'd of many a knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet she loves none but one, that Marinell is hight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"A Sea-nymphes sonne, that Marinell is hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of my deare Dame is loved dearely well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In other none, but him, she sets delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All her delight is set on Marinell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he sets nought at all by Florimell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Ladies love his mother long ygoe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did him, they say, forwarne through sacred spell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But fame now flies, that of a forreine foe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He is yslaine, which is the ground of all our woe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Five dayes there be since he (they say) was slaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And foure since Florimell the Court forwent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And vowed never to returne againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till him alive or dead she did invent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore, faire Sir, for love of knighthood gent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And honour of trew Ladies, if ye may</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By your good counsell, or bold hardiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or succour her, or me direct the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do one or other good, I you most humbly pray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"So may ye gaine to you full great renowme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all good Ladies through the worlde so wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And haply in her hart find highest rowme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whom ye seeke to be most magnifide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At least eternall meede shall you abide."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom the Prince: "Dwarfe, comfort to thee take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, till thou tidings learne what her betide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I here avow thee never to forsake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ill weares he armes, that nill them use for Ladies sake."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So with the Dwarfe he backe retourn'd againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke his Lady, where he mote her find;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by the way he greatly gan complaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The want of his good Squire late lefte behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For whom he wondrous pensive grew in mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For doubt of daunger which mote him betide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For him he loved above all mankinde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having him trew and faithfull ever tride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bold, as ever Squire that waited by knights side:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who all this while full hardly was assayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of deadly daunger, which to him betid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, whiles his Lord pursewd that noble Mayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After that foster fowle he fiercely rid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bene avenged of the shame he did</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To that faire Damzell: Him he chaced long</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through the thicke woods, wherein he would have hid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His shamefull head from his avengement strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And oft him threatned death for his outrageous wrong.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nathlesse the villein sped himselfe so well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether through swiftnesse of his speedy beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or knowledge of those woods where he did dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shortly he from daunger was releast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And out of sight escaped at the least:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet not escaped from the dew reward</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his bad deedes, which daily he increast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ceased not, till him oppressed hard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The heavy plague that for such leachours is prepard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For soone as he was vanisht out of sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His coward courage gan emboldned bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cast t'avenge him of that fowle despight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he had borne of his bold enimee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho to his brethren came, for they were three</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ungratious children of one gracelesse sire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto them complained how that he</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had used beene of that foolehardy Squire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So them with bitter words he stird to bloody ire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Forthwith themselves with their sad instruments</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of spoyle and murder they gan arme bylive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with him forth into the forrest went</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wreake the wrath, which he did earst revive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In their sterne brests, on him which late did drive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their brother to reproch and shamefull flight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For they had vow'd that never he alive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of that forest should escape their might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vile rancour their rude harts had fild with such despight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Within that wood there was a covert glade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Foreby a narrow foord, to them well knowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through which it was uneath for wight to wade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now by fortune it was overflowne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By that same way they knew that Squyre unknowne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mote algates passe: forthy themselves they set</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There in await, with thicke woods overgrowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the while their malice they did whet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With cruell threats his passage through the ford to let.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It fortuned, as they devised had:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gentle Squire came ryding that same way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unweeting of their wile and treason bad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through the ford to passen did assay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that fierce foster, which late fled away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stoutly foorth stepping on the further shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him boldly bad his passage there to stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till he had made amends, and full restore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all the damage which he had him doen afore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that at him a quiv'ring dart he threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With so fell force, and villeinous despite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That through his haberjeon the forkehead flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through the linked mayles empierced quite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But had no powre in his soft flesh to bite.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That stroke the hardy Squire did sore displease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But more that him he could not come to smite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For by no meanes the high banke he could sease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But laboured long in that deepe ford with vaine disease.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And still the foster with his long bore-speare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him kept from landing at his wished will.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Anone one sent out of the thicket neare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A cruell shaft, headed with deadly ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fethered with an unlucky quill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wicked steele stayd not till it did light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his kftjthigh JL jand deepely did it thrill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Exceeding griefe thatjwound in him empight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But more that with his foes he could not come to fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last, through wrath and vengeaunce making way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He on the bancke arryvd with mickle payne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where the third brother him did sore assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And drove at him with all his might and mayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A forest-bill, which both his hands did strayne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But warily he did avoide the blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his speare requited him againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That both his sides were thrilled with the throw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a large streame of blood out of the wound did flow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He, tombling downe, with gnashing teeth did bite</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bitter earth, and bad to lett him in</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the balefull house of endlesse night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where wicked ghosts doe waile their former sin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho gan the battaile freshly to begin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For nathemore for that speclacle bad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did th'other two their cruell vengeaunce blin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But both attonce on both sides him bestad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And load upon him layd his life for to have had.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho when that villayn he aviz'd, which late</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Affrighted had the fairest Florimell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of fiers fury and indignant hate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To him he turned, and with rigor fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Smote him so rudely on the Pannikell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to the chin he clefte his head in twaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Downe on the ground his carkas groveling fell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His sinfull sowle with desperate disdaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of her fleshly ferme fled to the place of paine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That seeing, now the only last of three</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who with that wicked shafte him wounded had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Trembling with horror, as that did foresee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fearefull end of his avengement sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through which he follow should his brethren bad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His bootelesse bow in feeble hand upcaught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therewith shott an arrow at the lad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, fayntly fluttering, scarce his helmet raught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And glauncing fel to ground, but him annoyed naught.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that he would have fled into the wood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Timias him lightly overhent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right as he entring was into the flood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strooke at him with force so violent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That headlesse him into the foord he sent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The carcas with the streame was carried downe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But th' head fell backeward on the Continent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So mischief fel upon the meaners crowne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They three be dead with shame, the Squire lives with renowne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He lives, but takes small joy of his renowne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For of that cruell wound he bled so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from his steed he fell in deadly swowne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet still the blood forth gusht in so great store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he lay wallowd all in his owne gore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now God thee keepe, thou gentlest squire alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Els shall thy loving Lord thee see no more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But both of comfort him thou shalt deprive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke thy selfe of honor which thou didst atchive.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Providence hevenly passeth living thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doth for wretched mens reliefe make way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For loe! great grace or fortune thither brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Comfort to him that comfortlesse now lay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In those same woods ye well remember may</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How that a noble hunteresse did wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee, that base Braggadochio did affray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And make him fast out of the forest ronne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Belphcebe was her name, as faire as Phcebus sunne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She on a day, as shee pursewd the chace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of some wilde beast, which with her arrowes keene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She wounded had, the same along did trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By tract of blood, which she had freshly scene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To have besprinckled all the grassy greene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By the great persue which she there perceav'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well hoped shee the beast engor'd had beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made more haste the life to have bereav'd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ah! her expectation greatly was deceav'd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Shortly she came whereas that wofull Squire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With blood deformed, lay in deadly swownd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In whose faire eyes, like lamps of quenched fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Christall humor stood congealed rownd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His locks, like faded leaves fallen to grownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Knotted with blood in bounches rudely ran;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his sweete lips, on which before that stownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bud of youth to blossome faire began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spoild of their rosy red were woxen pale and wan.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Saw never living eie more heavy sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That could have made a rocke of stone to rew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or rive in twaine: which when that Lady bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besides all hope, with melting eies did vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All suddeinly abasht shee chaunged hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with sterne horror backward gan to start;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when shee better him beheld shee grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of soft passion and unwonted smart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The point of pitty perced through</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Meekely shee bowed downe, to weete if life</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yett in his frosen members did remaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, feeling by his pulses beating rife</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the weake sowle her seat did yett retaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She cast to comfort him with busie paine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His double folded necke she reard upright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rubd his temples and each trembling vaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mayled haberjeon she did undight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from his head his heavy burganet did light.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Into the woods thenceforth in haste shee went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke for hearbes that mote him remedy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For shee of herbes had great intendiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Taught of the Nymphe which from her infancy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her nourced had in trew Nobility:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There, whether yt divine Tobacco Vere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or Panachasa, or Polygony,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee fownd, and brought it to her patient deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who al this while lay bleding out his hart-blood neare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The soveraine weede betwixt two marbles plaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee pownded small, and did in peeces bruze;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then atweene her lilly handes twaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into his wound the juice thereof did scruze;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And round about, as she could well it uze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The flesh therewith shee suppled and did steepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T'abate all spasme, and soke the swelling bruze;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, after having searcht the intuse deepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She with her scarf did bind the wound from cold to keepe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By this he had sweet life recur'd agayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, groning inly deepe, at last his eies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His watry eies drizling like deawy rayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He up gan lifte toward the azure skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whence descend all hopelesse remedies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith he sigh'd; and, turning him aside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The goodly Maide, ful of divinities</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gifts of heavenly grace, he by him spide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her bow and gilden quiver lying him beside.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Mercy, deare Lord!" (said he) "what grace in this</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That thou hast shewed to me sinfull wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To send thine Angell from her bowre of blis</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To comfort me in my distressed plight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Angell, or Goddesse doe I call thee right?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What service may I doe unto thee meete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hast from darkenes me returnd to light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with thy hevenly salves and med'cines sweete</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hast drest my sinfull wounds? I kisse thy blessed feete."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereat she blushing said; "Ah! gentle Squire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor Goddesse I, nor Angell; but the Mayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And daughter of a woody Nymphe, desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No service but thy safety and ayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which if thou gaine, I shal be well apayd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wee mortall wights, whose lives and fortunes bee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To comrnun accidents stil open layd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are bownd with commun bond of frai'ltee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To succor wretched wights who we captived see."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By this her Damzells, which the former chace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had undertaken after her, arryv'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As did Belphoebe, in the bloody place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thereby deemd the beast had bene depriv'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of life, whom late their ladies arrow ryv'd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forthy the bloody tract they followd fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every one to ronne the swiftest stryv'd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But two of them the rest far overpast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And where their Lady was arrived at the last.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Where when they saw that goodly boy with blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Defowled, and their Lady dresse his wownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They wondred much; and shortly understood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How him in deadly case theyr Lady fownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And reskewed out of the heavy stownd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones his warlike courser, which was strayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Farre in the woodes whiles that he lay in swownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She made those Damzels search; which being stayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They did him set theron, and forth with them convayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Into that forest farre they thence him led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where was their dwelling, in a pleasant glade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With mountaines rownd about environed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mightie woodes which did the valley shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And like a stately Theatre it made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spreading it selfe into a spatious plaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the midst a little river plaide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emongst the pumy stones, which seemd to plaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With gentle murmure that his cours they did restraine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Beside the same a dainty place there lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Planted with mirtle trees and laurells greene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which the birds song many a lovely lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Gods high praise, and of their loves sweet teene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As it an earthly Paradize had beene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In whose enclosed shadow there was pight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A-faire Pavilion, scarcely to bee scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which was al within most richly dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That greatest Princes liking it mote well delight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thither they brought that wounded Squyre, and layd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In easie couch his feeble limbes to rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He rested him awhile; and then the Mayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His readie wound with better salves new drest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Daily she dressed him, and did the best</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His grievous hurt to guarish, that she might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shortly she his dolour hath redrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his foule sore reduced to faire plight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It she reduced, but himselfe destroyed quight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O foolish physick, and unfruitfull paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That heales up one, and makes another wound!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She his hurt thigh to him recurd againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But hurt his hart, the which before was sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through an unwary dart, which did rebownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From her faire eyes and gratious countenaunce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What bootes it him from death to be unbownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be captived in endlesse duraunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sorrow and despeyre without aleggeaunce!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Still as his wound did gather, and grow hole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So still his hart woxe sore, and health decayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Madnesse to save a part, and lose the whole!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still whenas he beheld the heavenly Mayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles dayly playsters to his wownd she layd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So still his Malady the more increast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles her matchlesse beautie him dismayd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah God! what other could he do at least,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But love so fayre a Lady that his life releast?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Long while he strove in his corageous brest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With reason dew the passion to subdew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And love for to dislodge out of his nest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still when her excellencies he did vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her soveraine bountie and celestiall hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The same to love he strongly was constraynd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when his meane estate he did revew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He from such hardy boldnesse was restraynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of his lucklesse lott and cruell love thus playnd</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Unthankfull wretch," (said he) "is this the meed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which her soverain mercy thou doest quight?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy life she saved by her gratious deed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But thou doest weene with villeinous despight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To blott her honour, and her heavenly light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dye rather, dye, then so disloyally</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deeme of her high desert, or seeme so light:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayre death it is, to shonne more shame, to dy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dye rather, dy, then ever love disloyally.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But if to love disloyalty it bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall I then hate her that from deathes dore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me brought? ah, farre be such reproch fro mee!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What can I lesse doe then her love therefore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith I her dew reward cannot restore?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dye rather, dye, and dying doe her serve;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dying her serve, and living her adore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy life she gave, thy life she doth deserve:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dye rather, dye, then ever from her service swerve.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But, foolish boy, what bootes thy service bace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To her to whom the hevens doe serve and sew?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou, a mean Squyre of meeke and lowly place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She, hevenly borne and of celestiall hew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How then? of all love taketh equall vew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doth not highest God vouchsafe to take</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The love and service of the basest crew?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If she will not, dye meekly for her sake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dye rather, dye, then ever so faire love forsake!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus warreid he long time against his will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that through weaknesse he was forst at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To yield himselfe unto the mightie ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, as a viclour proud, gan ransack fast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His inward partes, and all his entrayles wast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That neither blood in face nor life in hart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It left, but both did quite drye up and blast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As percing levin, which the inner part</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of every thing consumes, and calcineth by art.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which seeing fayre Belphoebe gan to feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least that his wound were inly well not heald,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that the wicked steele empoysned were:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Litle shee weend that love he close conceald.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet still he wasted, as the snow congeald</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When the bright sunne his beams theron doth beat:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet never he his hart to her reveald;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But rather chose to dye for sorow great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then with dishonorable termes her to entreat.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She, gracious Lady, yet no paines did spare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To doe him ease, or doe him remedy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Many Restoratives of vertues rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And costly Cordialles she did apply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To mitigate his stubborne malady:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that sweet Cordiall, which can restore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A love-sick hart, she did to him envy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To him, and to all th'unworthy world forlore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She did envy that soverainft galvejn secret store.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That daintie Rose, the daughter of her Morne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More deare then life she tendered, whose flowre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The girlond of her honour did adorne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne suffred she the Middayes scorching powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne the sharp Northerne wind thereon to showre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But lapped up her silken leaves most chayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When so the froward skye began to lowre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, soone as calmed was the christall ayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She did it fayre dispred and let to florish fayre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eternall God, in his almightie powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make ensample of his heavenly grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Paradize whylome did plant this flowre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence he it fetcht out of her native place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did in stocke of earthly flesh enrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That mortall men her glory should admyre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In gentle Ladies breste and bounteous race</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of woman kind it fayrest Flowre doth spyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And beareth fruit of honour and all chast desyre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Fayre ympes of beautie, whose bright shining beames</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adorne the world with like to heavenly light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to your willes both royalties and Reames</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Subdew, through conquest of your wondrous might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With this fayre flowre your goodly girlonds dight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of chastity and vertue virginall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shall embellish more your beautie bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And crowne your heades with heavenly coronall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as the Angels weare before Gods tribunall!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To your faire selves a faire ensample frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of this faire virgin, this Belphebe fayre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom, in perfect love and spotlesse fame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of chastitie, none living may compayre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne poysnous Envy justly can empayre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The prayse of her fresh flowring Maydenhead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forthy she standeth on the highest stayre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of th' honorable stage of womanhead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Ladies all may follow her ensample dead.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In so great prayse of stedfast chastity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nathlesse she was so courteous and kynde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tempred with grace and goodly modesty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemed those two vertues strove to fynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The higher place in her Heroick mynd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So striving each did other more augment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both encreast the prayse of woman kynde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both encreast her beautie excellent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So all did make in her a perfect complement.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-6" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The birth of faire Belphoebe and</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of Amorett is told.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Gardins of Adonis fraught</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With pleasures manifold.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Well may I weene, faire Ladies, all this while</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye wonder how this noble Damozell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So great perfections did in her compile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith that in salvage forests she did dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So farre from court and royall Citadell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The great schoolmaistresse of all courtesy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seemeth that such wilde woodes should far expell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All civile usage and gentility,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gentle sprite deforme with rude rusticity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But to this faire Belphcebe in her berth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hevens so favorable were and free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Looking with myld aspecl upon the earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In th' Horoscope of her nativitee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the gifts of grace and chastitee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On her they poured forth of plenteous home:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Jove laught on Venus from his soverayne see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Phoebus with faire beames did her adorne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the Graces rockt her cradle being borne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her berth was of the wombe of Morning dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her conception of the joyous Prime;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all her whole creation did her shew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pure and unspotted from all loathly crime</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is ingenerate in fleshly slime.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So was this virgin borne, so was she bred;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So was she trayned up from time to time</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In all chaste vertue and true bounti-hed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till to her dew perfection she were ripened.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her mother was the faire Chrysogonee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The daughter of Amphisa, who by race</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Faerie was, yborne of high degree.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She bore Belphoebc; she bore in like cace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayre Amoretta in the second place:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These two were twinnjevand twixt them two did share</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The heritage of all celestiall grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the rest it seemd they robbed bare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of bounty, and of beautie, and all vertues rare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It were a goodly storie to declare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By what straunge accident faire Chrysogone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Conceiv'd these infants, and how them she bare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In this wilde forrest wandring all alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After she had nine moneths fulfild and gone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For not as other wemens commune brood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They were enwombed in the sacred throne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her chaste bodie; nor with commune food,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As other wemens babes, they sucked vitall blood:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But wondrously they were begot and bred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through influence of th' hevens fruitfull ray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As it in antique bookes is mentioned.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It was upon a Sommers shinie day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When Titan faire his beames did display,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In a fresh fountaine, far from all mens vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She bath'd her brest the boyling heat t'allay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She bath'd with roses red and violets blew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the sweetest flowers that in the forrest grew:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Till faint through yrkesome wearines, adowne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the grassy ground her selfe she layd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sleepe, the whiles a gentle slombring swowne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon her fell, all naked bare displayd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sunbeames bright upon her body playd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being through former bathing mollifide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pierst into her wombe, where they embayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With so sweet sence and secret powre unspide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in her pregnant flesh they shortly fruclifide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Miraculous may seeme to him that reades</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So straunge ensample of conception;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But reason teacheth that the fruitfull seades</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all things living, through impression</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the sunbeames in moyst complexion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe life conceive and quickned are by kynd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So, after Nilus inundation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Infinite shapes of creatures men doe fynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Informed in the mud on which the Sunne hath shynd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Great father he of generation</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is rightly cald, th'authour of life and light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his faire sister for creation</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ministreth matter fit, which, tempred right</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With heate and humour, breedes the living wight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So sprong these twinnes in womb of Chrysogone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet wist she nought thereof, but sore affright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wondred to see her belly so upblone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which still increast till she her terme had full outgone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whereof conceiving shame and foule disgrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Albe her guiltlesse conscience her cleard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She fled into the wildernesse a space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that unweeldy burden she had reard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shund dishonor which as death she feard:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where, wearie of long traveill, downe to rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her selfe she set, and comfortably cheard:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There a sad cloud of sleepe her overkest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seized every sence with sorrow sore opprest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It fortuned, faire Venus having lost</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her little sonne, the winged god of love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, for some light displeasure which him crost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was from her fled as flit as ayery Dove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And left her blisfull bowre of joy above:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(So from her often he had fled away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When she for ought him sharpely did reprove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wandred in the world in straunge aray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Disguiz'd in thousand shapes, that none might him bewray.)</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Him for to seeke, she left her heavenly hous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The house of goodly formes and faire aspect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence all the world derives the glorious</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Features of beautie, and all shapes select,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which high God his workmanship hath deckt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And searched everie way through which his wings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had borne him, or his tract she mote detect:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She promist kisses sweet, and sweeter things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the man that of him tydings to her brings.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>First she him sought in Court, where most he us'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whylome to haunt, but there she found him not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But many there she found which sore accus'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His falshood, and with fowle infamous blot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His cruell deedes and wicked wyles did spot:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ladies and Lordes she everywhere mote heare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Complayning, how with his empoysned shot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their wofull harts he wounded had whyleare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so had left them languishing twixt hope and feare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She then the Cities sought from gate to gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And everie one did aske, did he him see?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And everie one her answerd, that too late</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He had him scene, and felt the crueltee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his sharpe dartes and whot artilleree:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every one threw forth reproches rife</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his mischievous deedes, and sayd that hee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was the disturber of all civill life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The enimy of peace, and authour of all strife.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then in the countrey she abroad him sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the rurall cottages inquir'd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where also many plaintes to her were brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How he their heedelesse harts with love had fir'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his false venim through their veines inspir'd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the gentle Shepheard swaynes, which sat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Keeping their fleecy flockes as they were hyr'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She sweetly heard complaine, both how and what</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her sonne had to them doen; yet she did smile thereat.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when in none of all these she him got,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She gan avize where els he mote him hyde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last she her bethought that she had not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet sought the salvage woods and forests wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which full many lovely Nymphes abyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst whom might be that he did closely lye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that the love of some of them him tyde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forthy she thither cast her course t'apply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To search the secret haunts of Dianes company.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Shortly unto the wastefull woods she came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereas she found the Goddesse with her crew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After late chace of their embrewed game,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sitting beside a fountaine in a rew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some of them washing with the liquid dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From off their dainty limbs the dusty sweat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soyle, which did deforme their lively hew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Others lay shaded from the scorching heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rest upon her person gave attendance great.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She, having hong upon a bough on high</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her bow and painted quiver, had unlaste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her silver buskins from her nimble thigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her lanck loynes ungirt, and brests unbraste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After her heat the breathing cold to taste:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her golden lockes, that late in tresses bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Embreaded were for hindring of her haste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now loose about her shoulders hong undight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And were with sweet Ambrosia all besprinckled light.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as she Venus saw behinde her backe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She was asham'd to be so loose surpriz'd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And woxe halfe wroth against her damzels slacke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That had not her thereof before aviz'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But suffred her so carelesly disguiz'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be overtaken. Soone her garments loose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upgath'ring, in her bosome she compriz'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well as she might, and to the Goddesse rose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whiles all her Nymphes did like a girlond her enclose.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Goodly she gan faire Cytherea greet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shortly asked her, what cause her brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into that wildernesse for her unmeet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From her sweete bowres, and beds with pleasures fraught?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That suddein chaunge she straunge adventure thought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom halfe weeping she thus answered;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she her dearest sonne Cupido sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who in his frowardnes from her was fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she repented sore to have him angered.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereat Diana gan to smile, in scorne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her vaine playnt, and to her scoffing sayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Great pitty sure that ye be so forlorne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of your gay sonne, that gives ye so good ayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To your disports: ill mote ye bene apayd."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she was more engrieved, and replide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Faire sister, ill beseemes it to upbrayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A dolefull heart with so disdainfull pride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The like that mine may be your paine another tide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"As you in woods and wanton wildernesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your glory sett to chace the salvage beasts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So my delight is all in joyfulnesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In beds, in bowres, in banckets, and in feasts:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ill becomes you, with your lofty creasts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To scorne the joy that Jove is glad to seeke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We both are bownd to follow heavens beheasts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tend our charges with obeisaunce meeke.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spare, gentle sister, with reproch my paine to eeke;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And tell me, if that ye my sonne have heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To lurke emongst your Nimphes in secret wize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or keepe their cabins: much I am affeard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least he like one of them him selfe disguize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And turne his arrowes to their exercize.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So may he long him selfe full easie hide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he is faire and fresh in face and guize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As any Nimphe; (let not it be envide.")</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So saying, every Nimph full narrowly shee eide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Phoebe therewith sore was angered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sharply saide: "Goe, Dame; goe, seeke your boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where you him lately lefte, in Mars his bed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He comes not here; we scorne his foolish joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne lend we leisure to his idle toy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if I catch him in this company,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By Stygian lake I vow, whose sad annoy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Gods doe dread, he dearly shall abye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He clip his wanton wings, that he no more shall flye."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom whenas Venus saw so sore displeasd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee inly sory was, and gan relent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What shee had said; so her she soone appeasd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sugred words and gentle blandishment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which as a fountaine from her sweete lips went.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And welled goodly forth, that in short space</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She was well pleasd, and forth her damzells sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through all the woods, to search from place to place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If any tract of him or tidings they mote trace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To search the God of love her Nimphes she sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throughout the wandring forest every where:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after them her selfe eke with her went</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke the fugitive both farre and nere.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So long they sought, till they arrived were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In that same shady covert whereas lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Crysogone in slombry traunce whilere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who in her sleepe (a wondrous thing to say)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unwares had borne two babes, as faire as springing day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Unwares she them conceivd, unwares she bore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She bore withouten paine, as she conceiv'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withouten pleasure; ne her need implore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lucinaes aide: which when they both perceiv'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They were through wonder nigh of sence berev'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gazing each on other nought bespake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last they both agreed her seeming griev'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of her heavie swowne not to awake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But from her loving side the tender babes to take.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Up they them tooke; each one a babe uptooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with them carried to be fostered.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dame Phoebe to a Nymphe her babe betooke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be upbrought in perfect Maydenhed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, of her selfe, her name Belphcebe red:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Venus hers thence far away convayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be upbrought in goodly womanhed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, in her litle loves stead, which was strayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her Amoretta cald, to comfort her dismayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Shee brought her to her joyous Paradize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wher most she wonnes when she on earth does dwell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So faire a place as Nature can devize:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether in Paphos, or Cytheron hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or it in Gnidus bee, I wote not well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But well I wote by triall, that this same</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All other pleasaunt places doth excell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And called is by her lost lovers name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Gardin of Adonis, far renowmd by fame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In that same Gardin all the goodly flowres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith dame Nature doth her beautify,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And decks the girlonds of her Paramoures,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are fetcht: there is the first seminary</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all things that are borne to live and dye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">According to their kynds. Long worke it were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here to account the endlesse progeny</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the weeds that bud and blossome there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But so much as doth need must needs be counted here.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It sited was in fruitfull soyle of old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And girt in with two walls on either side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The one of yron, the other of bright gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none might thorough breake, nor overstride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And double gates it had which opened wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which both in and out men moten pas:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th'one faire and fresh, the other old and dride.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Old Genius the porter of them was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old Genius, the which a double nature has.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He letteth in, he letteth out to wend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All that to come into the world desire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A thousand thousand naked babes attend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About him day and night, which doe require</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he with fleshly weeds would them attire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as him list, such as eternall fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ordained hath, he clothes with sinfull mire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sendeth forth to live in mortall state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till they agayn returne backe by the hinder gate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>After that they againe retourned beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They in that Gardin planted bee agayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And grow afresh, as they had never scene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fleshly corruption, nor mortall payne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some thousand yeares so doen they there remayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then of him are clad with other hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or sent into the chaungefull world agayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till thither they retourne where first they grew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, like a wheele, arownd they ronne from old to new.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne needs there Gardiner to sett or sow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To plant or prune; for of their owne accord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All things, as they created were, doe grow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet remember well the mighty word</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which first was spoken by th'Almighty Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That bad them to increase and multiply:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne doe they need with water of the ford,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or of the clouds, to moysten their roots dry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For in themselyes eternall moisture they imply.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Infinite shapes of creatures there are bred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And uncouth formes, which none yet ever knew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every sort is in a sondry bed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sett by it selfe, and ranckt in comely rew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some fitt for reasonable sowles t'indew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some made for beasts, some made for birds to weare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the fruitfull spawne of fishes hew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In endlesse rancks along enraunged were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That seemd the Ocean could not containe them there.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Daily they grow, and daily forth are sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the world, it to replenish more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet is the stocke not lessened nor spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But still remaines in everlasting store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As it at first created was of yore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For in the wide wombe of the world there lyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hatefull darknes and in deepe horrore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An huge eternall Chaos, which supplyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The substaunces of natures fruitfull progenyes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All things from thence doe their first being fetch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And borrow matter whereof they are made;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, whenas forme and feature it does ketch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Becomes a body, and doth then invade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The state of life out of the griesly shade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That substaunce is eterne, and bideth so;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne when the life decayes and forme does fade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth it consume and into nothing goe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But chaunged is, and often altred to and froe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The substaunce is not chaungd nor altered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But th'only forme and outward fashion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For every substaunce is conditioned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To chaunge her hew, and sondry formes to don,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Meet for her temper and complexion:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For formes are variable, and decay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By course of kinde and by occasion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that faire flowre of beautie fades away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As doth the lilly fresh before the sunny ray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Great enimy to it, and to all the rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in the Gardin of Adonis springs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is wicked Tyme; who with his scyth addrest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Does mow the flowring herbes and goodly things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all their glory to the ground downe flings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where they do wither, and are fowly mard:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He flyes about, and with his flaggy winges</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beates downe both leaves and buds without regard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne ever pitty may relent his malice hard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet pitty often did the gods relent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see so faire thinges mard and spoiled quight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And their great mother Venus did lament</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The losse of her deare brood, her deare delight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her hart was pierst with pitty at the sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When walking through the Gardin them she saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet no'te she find redresse for such despight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all that lives is subject to that law;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All things decay in time, and to their end doe draw.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But were it not that Time their troubler is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All that in this delightfull Gardin growes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should happy bee, and have immortall blis:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For here all plenty and all pleasure flowes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sweete love gentle fitts emongst them throwes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without fell rancor or fond gealosy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Franckly each Paramor his leman knowes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each bird his mate; ne any does envy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their goodly meriment and gay felicity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There is continuall Spring, and harvest there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Continuall, both meeting at one tyme:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For both the boughes doe laughing blossoms beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with fresh colours decke the wanton Pryme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke attonce the heavy trees they clyme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which seeme to labour under their fruites lode:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles the joyous birdes make their pastyme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emongst the shady leaves, their sweet abode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And their trew loves without suspition tell abrode.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Right in the middest of that Paradise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There stood a stately Mount, on whose round top</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A gloomy grove of mirtle trees did rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose shady boughes sharp steele did never lop,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor wicked beastes their tender buds did crop,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But like a girlond compassed the hight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from their fruitfull sydes sweet gum did drop,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the ground, with pretious deaw bedight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Threw forth most dainty odours and most sweet delight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And in the thickest covert of that shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There was a pleasaunt Arber, not by art</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But of the trees owne inclination made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which knitting their rancke braunches, part to part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With wanton yvie twine entrayld athwart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Eglantine and Caprifole emong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fashiond above within their inmost part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nether Phoebus beams could through them throng,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor Aeolus sharp blast could worke them any wrong.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And all about grew every sort of flowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which sad lovers were transformde of yore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fresh Hyacinthus, Phoebus paramoure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dearest love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Foolish Narcisse, that likes the watry shore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sad Amaranthus, made a flowre but late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sad Amaranthus, in whose purple gore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me seemes I see Amintas wretched fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To whom sweet Poets verse hath given endlesse date.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There wont fayre Venus often to enjoy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her deare Adonis joyous company,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And reape sweet pleasure of the wanton boy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There yet, some say, in secret he does ly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lapped in flowres and pretious spycery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By her hid from the world, and from the skill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Stygian Gods, which doe her love envy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she her selfe, when ever that she will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Possesseth him, and of his sweetnesse takes her fill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And sooth, it seemes, they say; for he may not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ever dye, and ever buried bee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In balefull night where all thinges are forgot:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All be he subject to mortalitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet is eterne in mutabilitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by succession made perpetuall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Transformed oft, and chaunged diverslie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For him the Father of all formes they call:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therfore needs mote he live, that living gives to all.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There now he liveth in eternall blis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Joying his goddesse, and of her enjoyd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne feareth he henceforth that foe of his,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with his cruell tuske him deadly cloyd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that wilde Bore, the which him once annoyd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She firmely hath emprisoned for ay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her sweet love his malice mote avoyd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In a strong rocky Cave, which is, they say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hewen underneath that Mount, that none him losen may.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There now he lives in everlasting joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With many of the Gods in company</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which thither haunt, and with the winged boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sporting him selfe in safe felicity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who when he hath with spoiles and cruelty</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ransackt the world, and in the wofull harts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of many wretches set his triumphes hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thither resortes, and, laying his sad dartes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Asyde, with faire Adonis playes his wanton partes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And his trew love faire Psyche with him playes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayre Psyche to him lately reconcyld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After long troubles and unmeet upbrayes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which his mother Venus her revyld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke himselfe her cruelly exyld:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But now in stedfast love and happy state</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She with him lives, and hath him borne a chyld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pleasure, that doth both gods and men aggrate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pleasure, the daughter of Cupid and Psyche late.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hither great Venus brought this infant fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The yonger daughter of Chrysogonee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto Psyche with great trust and care</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Committed her, yfostered to bee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And trained up in trew feminitee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who no lesse carefully her tendered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then her owne daughter Pleasure, to whom shee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made her companion, and her lessoned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In all the lore of love, and goodly womanhead.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In which when she to perfect ripenes grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of grace and beautie noble Paragone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She brought her forth into the worldes vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be th'ensample of true love alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Lodestarre of all chaste affection</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To all fayre Ladies that doe live on grownd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Faery court she came; where many one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Admyrd her goodly haveour, and fownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His feeble hart wide launched with loves cruel wownd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But she to none of them her love did cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save to the noble knight Sir Scudamore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom her loving hart she linked fast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In faithfull love, t'abide for evermore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for his dearest sake endured sore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sore trouble of an hainous enimy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who her would forced have to have forlore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her former love and stedfast loialty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As ye may elswhere reade that ruefull history.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But well I weene, ye first desire to learne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What end unto that fearefull Damozell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which fledd so fast from that same foster stearne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom with his brethren Timias slew, befell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was, to weet, the goodly Florimell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who wandring for to seeke her lover deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her lover deare, her dearest Marinell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into misfortune fell, as ye did heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from Prince Arthure fled with wings of idle feare.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-7" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The witches sonne loves Florimell:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">She flyes; he faines to die.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Satyrane save the Squire of Dames</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">From Gyaunts tyranny.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Like as an Hynd forth singled from the heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hath escaped from a ravenous beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet flyes away of her owne feete afeard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every leafe, that shaketh with the least</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Murmure of winde, her terror hath encreast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So fledd fayre Florimell from her vaine feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long after she from perill was releast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each shade she saw, and each noyse she did heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did seeme to be the same which she escapt whileare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All that same evening she in flying spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all that night her course continewed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne did she let dull sleepe once to relent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor wearinesse to slack her hast, but fled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ever alike, as if her former dred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were hard behind, her ready to arrest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her white Palfrey, having conquered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The maistring raines out of her weary wrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perforce her carried where ever he thought best.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So long as breath and hable puissaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did native corage unto him supply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His pace he freshly forward did advaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And carried her beyond all jeopardy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But nought that wanteth rest can long aby:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He, having through incessant traveill spent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His force, at last perforce adowne did ly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne foot could further move. The Lady gent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereat was suddein strook with great astonishment;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, forst t'alight, on foot mote algates fare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A traveiler unwonted to such way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Need teacheth her this lesson hard and rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That fortune all in equall launce doth sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mortall miseries doth make her play.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So long she traveild, till at length she came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To an hilles side, which did to her bewray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A litle valley subject to the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All coverd with thick woodes that quite it overcame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Through the tops of the high trees she did descry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A litle smoke, whose vapour thin and light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Reeking aloft uprolled to the sky:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which chearefull signe did send unto her sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in the same did wonne some living wight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones her steps she thereunto applyd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And came at last in weary wretched plight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the place, to which her hope did guyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To finde some refuge there, and rest her wearie syde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There in a gloomy hollow glen she found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A little cottage, built of stickes and reedes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In homely wize, and wald with sods around;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which a witch did dwell, in loathly weedes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wilfull want, all carelesse of her needes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So choosing solitarie to abide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far from all neighbours, that her divelish deedes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hellish arts from people she might hide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hurt far off unknowne whom ever she envide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Damzell there arriving entred in;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where sitting on the flore the Hag she found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Busie (as seem'd) about some wicked gin:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, soone as she beheld that suddein stound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lightly upstarted from the dustie ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with fell looke and hollow deadly gaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stared on her awhile, as one astound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne had one word to speake for great amaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But shewd by outward signes that dread her sence did daze.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last, turning her feare to foolish wrath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She askt, what devill had her thither brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And who she was, and what unwonted path</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had guided her, unwelcomed, unsought?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which the Damzell, full of doubtfull thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her mildly answer'd: "Beldame, be not wroth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With silly Virgin, by adventure brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto your dwelling, ignorant and loth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That crave but rowme to rest while tempest overblo'th."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that adowne out of her christall eyne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Few trickling teares she softly forth let fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That like to orient perles did purely shyne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon her snowy cheeke; and therewithall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She sighed soft, that none so bestiall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor salvage hart, but ruth of her sad plight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would make to melt, or pitteously appall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that vile Hag, all were her whole delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In mischiefe, was much moved at so pitteous sight;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And gan recomfort her in her rude wyse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With womanish compassion of her plaint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wiping the teares from her suffused eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bidding her sit downe, to rest her faint</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wearie limbes awhile. She, nothing quaint</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor 'sdeignfull of so homely fashion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith brought she was now to so hard constraint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sate downe upon the dusty ground anon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As glad of that small rest as Bird of tempest gon.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho gan she gather up her garments rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her loose lockes to dight in order dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With golden wreath and gorgeous ornament;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom such whenas the wicked Hag did vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She was astonisht at her heavenly hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doubted her to deeme an earthly wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But or some Goddesse, or of Dianes crew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thought her to adore with humble spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>T'adore thing so divine as beauty were but right.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This wicked woman had a wicked sonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The comfort of her age and weary dayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A laesy loord, for nothing good to donne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But stretched forth in ydlenesse alwayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever cast his mind to covet prayse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ply himselfe to any honest trade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all the day before the sunny rayes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He us'd to slug, or sleepe in slothfull shade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such laesinesse both lewd and poore attonce him made.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He, comming home at undertime, there found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fayrest creature that he ever saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sitting beside his mother on the ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sight whereof did greatly him adaw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his base thought with terrour and with aw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So inly smot, that as one, which hath gaz'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On the bright Sunne unwares, doth soone withdraw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His feeble eyne, with too much brightnes daz'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So stared he on her, and stood long while amaz'd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Softly at last he gan his mother aske,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What mister wight that was, and whence deriv'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in so straunge disguizement there did maske,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by what accident she there arriv'd?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she, as one nigh of her wits depriv'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With nought but ghastly lookes him answered;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to a ghost, that lately is reviv'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From Stygian shores where late it wandered:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So both at her, and each at other wondered.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But the fayre Virgin was so meeke and myld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she to them vouchsafed to embace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her goodly port, and to their senses vyld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her gentle speach applyde, that in short space</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She grew familiare in that desert place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">During which time the Chorle, through her so kind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And courteise use, conceiv'd affection bace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cast to love her in his brutish mind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No love, but brutish lust, that was so beastly tind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Closely the wicked flame his bowels brent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shortly grew into outrageous fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet had he not the hart, nor hardiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As unto her to utter his desire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His caytive thought durst not so high aspire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with soft sighes and lovely semblaunces</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He ween'd that his affection entire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She should aread; many resemblaunces</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To her he made, and many kinde remembraunces.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Oft from the forrest wildings he did bring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose sides empurpled were with smyling red;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oft young birds, which he had taught to sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His maistresse praises sweetly caroled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Girlonds of flowres sometimes for her faire hed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">e fine would dight; sometimes the squirrell wild</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He brought to her in bands, as conquered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be her thrall, his fellow-servant vild:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All which she of him tooke with countenance meeke and mild.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, past a while, when she fit season saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To leave that desert mansion, she cast otnrw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In secret wize herselfe thence to withdraw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For feare of mischiefe, which she did forecast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might by the witch or by her sonne compast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her wearie Palfrey, closely as she might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now well recovered after long repast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his proud furnitures she freshly dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His late miswandred wayes now to remeasure right.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And earely, ere the dawning day appear'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She forth issewed, and on her journey went:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She went in perill, of each noyse affeard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of each shade that did it selfe present;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For still she feared to be overhent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that vile hag, or her uncivile sonne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who when, too late awaking, well they kent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That their fayre guest was gone, they both begonne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make exceeding mone, as they had been undonne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But that lewd lover did the most lament</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For her depart, that ever man did heare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He knockt his brest with desperate intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And scratcht his face, and with his teeth did teare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His rugged flesh, and rent his ragged heare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That his sad mother, seeing his sore plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was greatly woe begon, and gan to feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least his fraile senses were emperisht quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And love to frenzy turnd, sith love is franticke hight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All wayes shee sought him to restore to plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With herbs, with charms, with counsel, and with teares;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But tears, nor charms, nor herbs, nor counsell, might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Asswage the fury which his entrails teares:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So strong is passion that no reason heares.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho when all other helpes she saw to faile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She turnd her selfe backe to her wicked leares;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by her divelish arts thought to prevaile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bringe her backe againe, or worke her finall bale.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftesoones out of her hidden cave she cald</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An hideous beast of horrible aspect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T hat could the stoutest corage have appald;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Monstrous, mishapt, and all his backe was spect</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With thousand spots of colours queint elect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereto so swifte that it all beasts did pas:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like never yet did living eie detect;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But likest it to an Hyena was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That feeds on wemens flesh as others feede on gras.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It forth she cald, and gave it streight in charge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through thicke and thin her to poursew apace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne once to stay to rest, or breath at large,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till her he had attaind and brought in place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or quite devourd her beauties scornefull grace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Monster, swifte as word that from her went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Went forth in haste, and did her footing trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So sure and swiftly, through his perfect sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And passing speede, that shortly he her overhent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when the fearefull Damzell nigh espide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No need to bid her fast away to flie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ugly shape so sore her terrifide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it she shund no lesse then dread to die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her flitt palfrey did so well apply</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His nimble feet to her conceived feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That whitest his breath did strength to him supply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From peril free he away her did beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when his force gan faile his pace gan wex areare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which whenas she perceiv'd, she was dismayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At that same last extremity ful sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of her safety greatly grew afrayd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now she gan approch to the sea shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As it befell, that she could flie no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yield herselfe to spoile of greedinesse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lightly she leaped, as a wight forlore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From her dull horse, in desperate distresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to her feet betooke her doubtfull sickernesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Not halfe so fast the wicked Myrrha fled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From dread of her revenging fathers hond;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor halfe so fast to save her maydenhed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fled fearfull Daphne on th'Aegaean strond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Florimell fled from that Monster yond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To reach the sea ere she of him were raught:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For in the sea to drowne herselfe she fond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rather then of the tyrant to be caught:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereto fear gave her wings, and need her corage taught.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It fortuned (high God did so ordaine)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As shee arrived on the roring shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In minde to leape into the mighty maine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A little bote lay hoving her before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which there slept a fisher old and pore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles his nets were drying on the sand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the same shee lept, and with the ore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did thrust the shallop from the floting strand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So safety fownd at sea which she fownd not at land.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Monster, ready on the pray to sease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was of his forward hope deceived quight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne durst assay to wade the perlous seas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But greedily long gaping at the sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last in vaine was forst to turne his flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tell the idle tidings to his Dame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, to avenge his divelish despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He sett upon her Palfrey tired lame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And slew him cruelly ere any reskew came.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, after having him embowelled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To fill his hellish gorge, it chaunst a knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To passe that way, as forth he traveiled:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yt was a goodly Swaine, and of great might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As ever man that bloody field did fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in vain sheows, that wont yong knights bewitch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And courtly services, tooke no delight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But rather joyd to bee then seemen sich,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For both to be and seeme to him was labor lich.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It was to weete the good Sir Satyrane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That raungd abrode to seeke adventures wilde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As was his wont, in forest and in plaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He was all armd in rugged steele unfilde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As in the smoky forge it was compilde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his Scutchin bore a Satyres hedd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He comming present, where the Monster vilde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon that milke-white Palfreyes carcas fedd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto his reskew ran, and greedily him spedd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There well perceivd he that it was the horse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereon faire Florimell was wont to ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of that feend was rent without remorse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much feared he least ought did ill betide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To that faire Maide, the flowre of wemens pride;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For her he dearely loved, and in all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His famous conquests highly magnifide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besides, her golden girdle, which did fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From her in flight, he fownd, that did him sore apall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Full of sad feare and doubtfull agony</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fiercely he flew upon that wicked feend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with huge strokes and cruell battery</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him forst to leave his pray, for to attend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him selfe from deadly daunger to defend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full many wounds in his corrupted flesh</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He did engrave, and muchell blood did spend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet might not doe him die: but aie more fresh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fierce he still appeard, the more he did him thresh.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He wist not how him to despoile of life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne how to win the wished victory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith him he saw still stronger grow through strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him selfe weaker through infirmity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Greatly he grew enrag'd, and furiously</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hurling his sword away he lightly lept</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the beast, that with great cruelty</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rored and raged to be underkept;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet he perforce him held, and strokes upon him hept.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As he that strives to stop a suddein flood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in strong bancks his violence enclose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forceth it swell above his wonted mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And largely overflow the fruitfull plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the countrey seemes to be a Maine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the rich furrowes flote, all quite fordonne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wofull husbandman doth lowd complaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see his whole yeares labor lost so soone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which to God he made so many an idle boone:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So him he held, and did through might amate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So long he held him, and him bett so long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That at the last his fiercenes gan abate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And meekely stoup unto the victor strong:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, to avenge the implacable wrong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he supposed donne to Florimell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sought by all meanes his dolor to prolong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith dint of steele his carcas could not quell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His maker with her charmes had framed him so well.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The golden ribband, which that virgin wore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About her sclender waste, he tooke in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with it bownd the beast, that lowd did rore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For great despight of that unwonted band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet dared not his victor to withstand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But trembled like a lambe fled from the pray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the way him followd on the strand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he had long bene learned to obay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet never learned he such service till that day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus as he led the Beast along the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He spide far off a mighty Giauntesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fast flying, on a Courser dapled gray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From a bold knight that with great hardinesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her hard pursewd, and sought for to suppresse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She bore before her lap a dolefull Squire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lying athwart her horse in great distresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fast bounden hand and foote with cords of wire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom she did meane to make the thrall of her desire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which whenas Satyrane beheld, in haste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He lefte his captive Beast at liberty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And crost the nearest way, by which he cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her to encounter ere she passed by;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she the way shund nathemore forthy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But forward gallopt fast; which when he spyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mighty speare he couched warily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at her ran: she, having him descryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her selfe to fight addrest, and threw her lode aside.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like as a Goshauke, that in foote doth beare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A trembling Culver, having spide on hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An Eagle that with plumy wings doth sheare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The subtile ayre stouping with all his might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The quarry throwes to ground with fell despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the batteill doth her selfe prepare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So ran the Geauntesse unto the fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her fyrie eyes with furious sparkes did stare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with blasphemous bannes high God in peeces tare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She caught in hand an huge great yron mace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith she many had of life depriv'd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, ere the stroke could seize his aymed place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His speare amids her sun-brode shield arriv'd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet nathemore the steele asonder riv'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All were the beame in bignes like a mast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne her out of the stedfast sadle driv'd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, glauncing on the tempred metall, brast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In thousand shivers, and so forth beside her past.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her Steed did stagger with that puissaunt strooke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she no more was moved with that might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then it had lighted on an aged Oke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or on the marble Pillour that is pight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the top of Mount Olympus hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the brave youthly Champions to assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With burning charet wheeles it nigh to smite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But who that smites it mars his joyous play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And is the spectacle of ruinous decay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet, therewith sore enrag'd, with sterne regard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her dreadfull weapon she to him addrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which on his helmet martelled so hard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That made him low incline his lofty crest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bowd his battred visour to his brest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith he was so stund that he n'ote ryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But reeled to and fro from east to west.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when his cruell enimy espyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She lightly unto him adjoyned syde to syde;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, on his collar laying puissaunt hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of his wavering seat him pluckt perforse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perforse him pluckt, unable to withstand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or helpe himselfe; and laying thwart her horse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In loathly wise like to a carrion corse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She bore him fast away. Which when the knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her pursewed saw, with great remorse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He nere was touched in his noble spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gan encrease his speed as she encreast her flight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when as nigh approching she espyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She threw away her burden angrily;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she list not the batteill to abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But made her selfe more light away to fly:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet her the hardy knight pursewd so nye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That almost in the backe he oft her strake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But still, when him at hand she did espy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She turnd, and semblaunce of faire fight did make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, when he stayd, to flight againe she did her take.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By this the good Sir Satyrane gan wake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of his dreame that did him long entraunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, seeing none in place, he gan to make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Exceeding mone, and curst that cruell chaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which reft from him so faire a chevisaunce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At length he spyde whereas that wofull Squyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom he had reskewed from captivaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his strong foe, lay tombled in the myre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unable to arise, or foote or hand to styre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom approching, well he mote perceive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In that fowle plight a comely personage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lovely face, made fit for to deceive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fraile Ladies hart with loves consuming rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now in the blossome of his freshest age.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He reard him up and loosd his yron bands.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after gan inquire his parentage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And how he fell into the Gyaunts hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And who that was which chaced her along the lands.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then trembling yet through feare the Squire bespake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"That Geauntesse Argante is behight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A daughter of the Titans which did make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Warre against heven, and heaped hils on hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To scale the skyes and put Jove from his right:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her syre Typhoeus was; who, mad through merth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dronke with blood of men slaine by his might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through incest her of his owne mother Earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whylome begot, being but halfe twin of that berth:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"For at that berth another Babe she bore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet, the mightie Ollyphant, that wrought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great wreake to many errant knights of yore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many hath to foule confusion brought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These twinnes, men say, (a thing far passing thought)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While in their mothers wombe enclosd they were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere they into the lightsom world were brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In fleshly lust were mingled both yfere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in that monstrous wise did to the world appere.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So liv'd they ever after in like sin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst natures law and good behayeoure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But greatest shame was to that maiden twin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, not content so fowly to devoure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her native flesh and staine her brothers bowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did wallow in all other fleshly myre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And suffred beastes her body to deflowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So whot she burned in that lustfull fyre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet all that might not slake her sensuall desyre:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But over all the countrie she did raunge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke young men to quench her flaming thrust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And feed her fancy with delightfull chaunge:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom so she fittest findes to serve her lust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through her maine strength, in which she most doth trust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She with her bringes into a secret He,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where in eternall bondage dye he must,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or be the vassall of her pleasures vile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in all shamefull sort him selfe with her defile.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Me, seely wretch, she so at vauntage caught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After she long in waite for me did lye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And meant unto her prison to have brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her lothsom pleasure there to satisfye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That thousand deathes me lever were to dye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then breake the vow that to faire Columbell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I plighted have, and yet keepe stedfastly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As for my name, it mistreth not to tell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Call me the Squyre of Dames; that me beseemeth well.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But that bold knight, whom ye pursuing saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Geauntesse, is not such as she seemd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But a faire virgin that in martiall law</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And deedes of armes above all Dames is deem'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And above many knightes is eke esteemd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For her great worth: She Palladine is hight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She you from death, you me from dread, redeemd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne any may that Monster match in fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But she, or such as she, that is so chaste a jvvight."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Her well beseemes that Quest," (quoth Satyrane)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"But read, thou Squyre of Dames, what vow is this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which thou upon thy selfe hast lately ta'ne?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"That shall I you recount," (quoth he) "y wis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So be ye pleasd to pardon all amis.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That gentle Lady whom I love and serve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After long suit and wearie servicis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did aske me, how I could her love deserve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And how she might be sure that I would never swerve?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"I, glad by any meanes her grace to gaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Badd her commaund my life to save or spill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones she badd me, with incessaunt paine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wander through the world abroad at will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every where, where with my power or skill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I might doe service unto gentle Dames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I the same should faithfully fulfill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at the twelve monethes end should bring their names</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pledges, as the spoiles of my victorious games.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"So well I to faire Ladies service did,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And found such favour in their loving hartes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ere the yeare his course had compassid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thre hundred pledges for my good desartes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thrice three hundred thanks for my good partes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I with me brought, and did to her present:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when she saw, more bent to eke my smartes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then to reward my trusty true intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She gan for me devise a grievous punishment;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"To weet, that I my traveill should resume,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with like labour walke the world arownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever to her presence should presume,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till I so many other Dames had fownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which, for all the suit I could propownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would me refuse their pledges to afford,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But did abide for ever chaste and sownd."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ah! gentle Squyre," (quoth he) "tell at one word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How many fownd'st thou such to put in thy record?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Indeed, Sir knight," (said he) "one word may tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All that I ever fownd so wisely stayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For onely three they were disposd so well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet three yeares I now abrode have strayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To fynd them out." "Mote I," (then laughing sayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The knight) "inquire of thee what were those three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which thy proffred curtesie denayd?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ill they seemed sure avizd to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or brutishly brought up, that nev'r did fashions see."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"The first which then refused me," (said hee)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Certes was but a common Courtisane;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet flat refusd to have adoe with mee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because I could not give her many a Jane."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Thereat full hartely laughed Satyrane.)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"The second was an holy Nunne to chose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which would not let me be her Chappellane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because she knew, she said, I would disclose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her counsell, if she should her trust in me repose.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"The third a Damzell was of low degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom I in countrey cottage fownd by chaunce:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full litle weened I that chastitee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had lodging in so meane a maintenaunce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was she fay re, and in her countenaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dwelt simple truth in seemely fashion.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long thus I woo'd her with due observaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hope unto my pleasure to have won;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But was as far at last, as when I first begon.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Safe her, I never any woman found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That chastity did for it selfe embrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But were for other causes firme and sound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Either for want of handsome time and place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or else for feare of shame and fowle disgrace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus am I hopelesse ever to attaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Ladies love in such a desperate case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all my dayes am like to waste in vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seeking to match the chaste with th'unchaste Ladies traine."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Perdy" (sayd Satyrane) "thou Squyre of Dames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great labour fondly hast thou hent in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To get small thankes, and therewith many blames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That may emongst Alcides labours stand."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence backe returning to the former land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where late he left the Beast he overcame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He found him not; for he had broke his band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And was returnd againe unto his Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tell what tydings of fayre Florimell became.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-8" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The Witch creates a snowy Lady</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Like to Florimell;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who, wrong'd by Carle, by Proteus sav'd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Is sought by Paridell.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>So oft as I this history record,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My heart doth melt with meere compassion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To thinke how causelesse, of her owne accord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This gentle Damzell, whom I write upon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should plonged be in such affliction</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without all hope of comfort or reliefe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sure, I weene, the hardest hart of stone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would hardly finde to aggravate her griefe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For misery craves rather mercy then repriefe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But that accursed Hag, her hostesse late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had so enranckled her malitious hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she desyrd th'abridgement of her fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or long enlargement of her painefull smart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now when the Beast, which by her wicked art</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Late foorth she sent, she backe retourning spyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tyde with her gplden-gifdie; it a part</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her rich spoyles whom he had earst destroyd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She weend, and wondrous gladnes to her hart applyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, with it forming hast'ly to her sonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thought with that sight him much to have reliv'd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, thereby deeming sure the thing as donne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His former griefe with furie fresh reviv'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much more then earst, and would have algates riv'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hart out of his brest: for sith her dedd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He surely dempt, himselfe he thought depriv'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quite of all hope wherewith he long had fedd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His foolish malady, and long time had misledd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With thought whereof exceeding mad he grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his rage his mother would have slaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had she not fled into a secret mew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where she was wont her Sprightes to entertaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The maisters of her art: there was she faine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To call them all in order to her ayde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And them conjure, upon eternall paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To counsell her, so carefully dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How she might heale her sonne whose senses were decayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By their advice, and her owne wicked wit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She there deviz'd a wondrous worke to frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose like on earth was never framed yit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That even Nature selfe envide the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And grudg'd to see the counterfet should shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The thing it selfe: In hand she boldly tooke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make another like the former Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another Florimell, in shape and looke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So lively and so like, that many it mistooke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The substance, whereof she the body made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was purest snow in massy mould congeald,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which she had gathered in a shady glade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the Riphoean hils, to her reveald</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By errant Sprights, but from all men conceald:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The same she tempred with fine Mercury</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And virgin wex that never yet was seald,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mingled them with perfect vermily;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That like a lively sanguine it seemd to the eye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Instead of eyes two burning lampes she set</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In silver sockets, shyning like the skyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And a quicke moving Spirit did arret</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To stirre and roll them like to womens eyes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Instead of yellow lockes she did devyse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With golden wyre to weave her curled head;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet golden wyre was not so yellow thryse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Florimells fayre heare: and, in the stead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of life, she put a Spright to rule the carcas dead;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A wicked Spright, yfraught with fawning guyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fayre resemblance above all the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with the Prince of Darkenes fell somewhyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From heavens blis and everlasting rest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him needed not instruct which way were best</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him selfe to fashion likest Florimell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne how to speake, ne how to use his gest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he in counterfesaunce did excell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the wyles of wemens wits knew passing well.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Him shaped thus she deckt in garments gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Florimell had left behind her late;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That who so then her saw would surely say</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It was her selfe whom it did imitate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or fayrer then her selfe, if ought algate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might fayrer be. And then she forth her brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto her sonne that lay in feeble state;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who seeing her gan streight upstart, and thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She was the Lady selfe whom he so long had sought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho fast her clipping twixt his armes twayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Extremely joyed in so happy sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soone forgot his former sickely payne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she, the more to seeme such as she hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Coyly rebutted his embracement light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet still, with gentle countenaunce, retain'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enough to hold a foole in vaine delight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him long she so with shadowes entertain'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As her Creatresse had in charge to her ordain'd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Till on a day, as he disposed was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To walke the woodes with that his Idole faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her to disport and idle time to pas</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In th'open freshnes of the gentle aire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A knight that way there chaunced to repaire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet knight he was not, but a boastfull swaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That deedes of armes had ever in despaire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proud Braggadocchio, that in vaunting vaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His glory did repose, and credit did maintaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He, seeing with that Chorle so faire a wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Decked with many a costly ornament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much merveiled thereat, as well he might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thought that match a fowle disparagement:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His bloody speare eftesoones he boldly bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the silly clowne, who dead through feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fell streight to ground in great astonishment.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Villein," (sayd he) "this Lady is my deare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dy, if thou it gainesay: I will away her beare."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The fearefull Chorle durst not gainesay nor dooe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But trembling stood, and yielded him the pray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, finding litle leasure her to wooe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On Tromparts steed her mounted without stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And without reskew led her quite away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proud man himselfe then Braggadochio deem'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And next to none after that happy day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being possessed of that spoyle, which seem'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fairest wight on ground, and most of men esteem'd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, when hee saw him selfe free from poursute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan make gentle purpose to his Dame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With termes of love and lewdnesse dissolute;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he could well his glozing speaches frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To such vaine uses that him best became:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she thereto would lend but light regard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As seeming sory that she ever came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into his powre, that used her so hard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To reave her honor, which she more then life prefard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus as they two of kindnes treated long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There them by chaunce encountred on the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An armed knight upon a courser strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose trampling feete upon the hollow lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seemed to thunder, and did nigh affray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Capons corage: yet he looked grim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And faynd to cheare his lady in dismay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who seemd for feare to quake in every lim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her to save from outrage meekely prayed him.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Fiercely that straunger forward came: and, nigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Approching, with bold words and bitter threat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bad that same boaster, as he mote, on high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To leave to him that lady for excheat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or bide him batteill without further treat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That challenge did too peremptory seeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fild his senses with abashment great;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet seeing nigh him jeopardy extreme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He it dissembled well, and light seemd to esteeme;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Saying, "Thou foolish knight, that weenst with words</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To steale away that I with blowes have wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And brought through points of many perilous swords:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if thee list to see thy Courser ronne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or prove thy selfe, this sad encounter shonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seeke els without hazard of thy hedd."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At those prowd words that other knight begonne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wex exceeding wroth, and him aredd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To turne his steede about, or sure he should be dedd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Sith then," (said Braggadochio) "needes thou wilt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy daies abridge through proofe of puissaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turne we our steeds; that both in equall tilt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May meete againe, and each take happy chaunce."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This said, they both a furlongs mountenaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Retird their steeds, to ronne in even race;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Braggadochio, with his bloody launce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Once having turnd, no more returnd his face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">lefte his love to losse, and fled him selfe apace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The knight, him seeing flie, had no regard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him to poursew, but to the lady rode;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And having her from Trompart lightly reard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his Courser sett the lovely lode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with her fled away without abode.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well weened he, that fairest Florimell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It was with whom in company he yode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so her selfe did alwaies to him tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So made him thinke him selfe in heven that was in hell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Florimell her selfe was far away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Driven to great distresse by fortune straunge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And taught the carefull Mariner to play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith late mischaunce had her compeld to chaunge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The land for sea, at randon there to raunge:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yett there that cruell Queene avengeresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not satisfyde so far her to estraunge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From courtly blis and wonted happinesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did heape on her new waves of weary wretchednesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For being fled into the fishers bote</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For refuge from the Monsters cruelty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long so she on the mighty maine did flote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with the tide drove forward carelesly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For th'ayre was milde and cleared was the skie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all his windes Dan Aeolus did keepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From stirring up their stormy enmity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As pittying to see her waile and weepe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all the while the fisher did securely sleepe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last when droncke with drowsinesse he woke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saw his drover drive along the streame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He was dismayd; and thrise his brest he stroke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For marveill of that accident extreame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when he saw that blazing beauties beame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with rare light his bote did beautifye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He marveild more, and thought he yet did dreame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not well awakte; or that some extasye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Assotted had his sence, or dazed was his eye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when her well avizing hee perceiv'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be no vision nor fantasticke sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great comfort of her presence he conceiv'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And felt in his old corage new delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To gin awake, and stir his frosen spright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho rudely askte her, how she thither came?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ah!" (sayd she) "father, I note read aright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What hard misfortune brought me to this same;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet am I glad that here I now in safety ame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But thou, good man, sith far in sea we bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the great waters gin apace to swell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That now no more we can the mayn-land see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have care, I pray, to guide the cock-bote well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least worse on sea then us on land befell."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereat th'old man did nought but fondly grin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And satde his boat the way could wisely tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But his deceiptfull eyes did never lin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To looke on her faire face and marke her snowy skin.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The sight whereof in his congealed flesh</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Infixt such secrete sting of greedy lust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the drie withered stocke it gan refresh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And kindled heat that soone in flame forth brust:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The driest wood is soonest burnt to dust.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rudely to her he lept, and his rough hond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where ill became him rashly would have thrust;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she with angry scorne did him withstond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shamefully reproved for his rudenes fond.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But he, that never good nor maners knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her sharpe rebuke full litle did esteeme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hard is to teach an old horse amble trew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The inward smoke, that did before but steeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Broke into open fire and rage extreme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now he strength gan adde unto his will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forcyng to doe that did him fowle misseeme.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beastly he threwe her downe, ne car'd to spill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her garments gay with scales offish that all did fill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The silly virgin strove him to withstand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All that she might, and him in vaine revild:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee strugled strongly both with foote and hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To save her honor from that villaine vilde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cride to heven, from humane help exild.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O! ye brave knights, that boast this Ladies love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where be ye now, when she is nigh defild</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of filthy wretch? well may she you reprove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of falsehood or of slouth, when most it may behove.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But if that thou, Sir Satyran, didst weete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or thou, Sir Peridure, her sory state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How soone would yee assemble many a fleete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To fetch from sea that ye at land lost late!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Towres, citties, kingdomes, ye would ruinate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In your avengement and despiteous rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought your burning fury mote abate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if Sir Calidore could it presage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No living creature could his cruelty asswage.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But sith that none of all her knights is nye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">See how the heavens, of voluntary grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soveraine favor towards chastity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe succor send to her distressed cace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So much high God doth innocence embrace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It fortuned, whilest thus she stifly strove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the wide sea importuned long space</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With shrilling shriekes, Proteus abrode did rove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along the fomy waves driving his finny drove.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Proteus is Shepheard of the seas of yore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hath the charge of Neptunes mighty heard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An aged sire with head all frory hore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sprinckled frost upon his deawy beard:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who when those pittifull outcries he heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through all the seas so ruefully resownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His charett swifte in hast he thither steard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with a teeme of scaly Phocas bownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was drawne upon the waves that fomed him arownd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And comming to that Fishers wandring bote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That went at will withouten card or sayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He therein saw that yrkesome sight, which smote</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deepe indignation and compassion frayle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into his hart attonce: streight did he hayle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The greedy villein from his hoped pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which he now did very litle fayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his staffe, that drives his heard astray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him b'ett so sore, that life and sence did much dismay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The whiles the pitteous Lady up did ryse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ruffled and fowly raid with filthy soyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And blubbred face with teares of her faire eyes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her heart nigh broken was with weary toyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To save her selfe from that outrageous spoyle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when she looked up, to weet what wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had her from so infamous fact assoyld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For shame, but more for feare of his grim sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Downe in her lap she hid her face, and lowdly shright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her selfe not saved yet from daunger dredd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She thought, but chaung'd from one to other feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as a fearefull partridge, that is fledd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the sharpe hauke which her attached neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fals to ground to seeke for succor theare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereas the hungry Spaniells she does spye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With greedy jawes her ready for to teare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In such distresse and sad perplexity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was Florimell, when Proteus she did see her by.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But he endevored with speaches milde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her to recomfort, and accourage bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bidding her feare no more her foeman vilde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor doubt himselfe; and who he was her told:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet all that could not from affright her hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne to recomfort her at all prevayld;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For her faint hart was with the frosen cold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Benumbd so inly, that her wits nigh fayld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all her sences with abashment quite were quayld.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her up betwixt his rugged hands he reard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his frory lips full softly kist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles the cold ysickles from his rough beard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dropped adowne upon her yvory brest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet he him selfe so busily addrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her out of astonishment he wrought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And out of that same fishers filthy nest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Removing her, into his charet brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there with many gentle termes her faire besought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But that old leachour, which with bold assault</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That beautie durst presume to violate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He cast to punish for his hainous fault:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then tooke he him, yet trembling sith of late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tyde behind his charet, to aggrate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The virgin whom he had abusde so sore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So drag'd him through the waves in scornfull state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after cast him up upon the shore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Florimell with him unto his bowre he bore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His bowre is in the bottom of the maine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under a mightie rocke, gainst which doe rave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The roring billowes in their proud disdaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with the angry working of the wave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therein is eaten out an hollow cave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemes rough Masons hand with engines keene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had long while laboured it to engrave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There was his wonne; ne living wight was scene</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save one old Nymph, hight Panope, to keepe it cleane.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thither he brought the sory Florimell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And entertained her the best he might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Panope her entertaind eke well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As an immortall mote a mortall wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To winne her liking unto his delight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With flattering wordes he sweetly wooed her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And offered faire guiftes t'allure her sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she both offers and the offerer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Despysde, and all the fawning of the flatterer.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Dayly he tempted her with this or that,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And never suffred her to be at rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But evermore she him refused flat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all his fained kindnes did detest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So firmely she had sealed up her brest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes he boasted that a God he hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she a mortall creature loved best:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then he would make him selfe a mortall wight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But then she said she lov'd none, but a Faery knight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then like a Faerie knight him selfe he drest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For every shape on him he could endew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then like a king he was to her exprest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And offred kingdoms unto her in vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be his Leman and his Lady trew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when all this he nothing saw prevaile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With harder meanes he cast her to subdew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with sharpe threates her often did assayle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So thinking for to make her stubborne corage quayle.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To dreadfull shapes he did him selfe transforme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now like a Gyaunt; now like to a feend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then like a Centaure; then like to a storme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Raging within the waves: thereby he weend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her will to win unto his wished eend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when with feare, nor favour, nor with all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He els could doe, he saw him selfe esteemd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Downe in a Dongeon deepe he let her fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And threatned there to make her his eternall thrall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eternall thraldome was to her more liefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then losse of chastitie, or chaunge of love:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dye had she rather in tormenting griefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then any should of falsenesse her reprove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or loosenes, that she lightly did remove.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most vertuous virgin! glory be thy meed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And crowne of heavenly prayse with Saintes above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where most sweet hymmes of this thy famous deed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are still emongst them song, that far my rymes exceed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Fit song of Angels caroled to bee!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yet whatso my feeble Muse can frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shal be t' advance thy goodly chastitee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to enroll thy memorable name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In th' heart of every honourable Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they thy vertuous deedes may imitate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And be partakers of thy endlesse fame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yt yrkes me leave thee in this wofull state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tell of Satyrane where I him left of late.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who having ended with that Squyre of Dames</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A long discourse of his adventures vayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which himselfe then Ladies more defames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rinding not th' Hyena to be slayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that same Squyre retourned back againe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To his first way. And, as they forward went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They spyde a knight fay re pricking on the playne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if he were on some adventure bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in his port appeared manly hardiment.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sir Satyrane him towardes did addresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet what wight he was, and what his quest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, comming nigh, eftsoones he gan to gesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both by the burning hart which on his brest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He bare, and by the colours in his crest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Paridell it was. Tho to him yode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him saluting as beseemed best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan first inquire of tydinges farre abrode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And afterwardes on what adventure now he rode.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who thereto answering said: "The tydinges bad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which now in Faery court all men doe tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which turned hath great mirth to mourning sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is the late ruine of proud Marinell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And suddein parture of faire Florimell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To find him forth: and after her are gone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All the brave knightes that doen in armes excell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To savegard her y wandred all alone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Emongst the rest my lott (unworthy') is to be one."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ah! gentle knight," (said then Sir Satyrane)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Thy labour all is lost, I greatly dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hast a thanklesse service on thee ta'ne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And offrest sacrifice unto the dead:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For dead, I surely doubt, thou maist aread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Henceforth for ever Florimell to bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the noble knights of Maydenhead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which her ador'd, may sore repent with mee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all faire Ladies may for ever sory bee."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which wordes when Paridell had heard, his hew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan greatly chaunge and seemd dismaid to bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then said: "Fayre Sir, how may I weene it trew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ye doe tell in such uncerteintee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or speake ye of report, or did ye see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Just cause of dread, that makes ye doubt so sore?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, perdie, elles how mote it ever bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ever hand should dare for to engore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her noble blood? The hevens such crueltie abhore."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"These eyes did see that they will ever rew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T' have scene," (quoth he) "when as a monstrous beast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Palfrey whereon she did travell slew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of his bowels made his bloody feast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which speaking token sheweth at the least</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her certeine losse, if not her sure decay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besides, that more suspicion encreast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I found her golden girdle cast astray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Distaynd with durt and blood, as relique of the pray."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ay me!" (said Paridell) "the signes be sadd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, but God turne the same to good sooth-say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Ladies safetie is sore to be dradd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet will I not forsake my forward way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till triall doe more certeine truth bewray."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Faire Sir," (quoth he) "well may it you succeed!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne long shall Satyrane behind you stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to the rest, which in this Quest proceed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My labour adde, and be partaker of their speed."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ye noble knights," (said then the Squyre of Dames)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Well may yee speede in so praiseworthy payne!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But sith the Sunne now ginnes to slake his beames</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In deawy vapours of the westerne mayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lose the teme out of his weary wayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mote not mislike you also to abate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your zealous hast, till morrow next againe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both light of heven and strength of men relate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which if ye please, to yonder castle turne your gate."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That counsell pleased well: so all yfere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth marched to a Castle them before;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where soone arryving they restrained were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of ready entraunce, which ought evermore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To errant knights be commune: wondrous sore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereat displeasd they were, till that young Squyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan them informe the cause, why that same dore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was shut to all which lodging did desyre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which to let you weet will further time requyre.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-9" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Malbecco will no straunge knights host,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">For peevish gealosie.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Paridell giusts with Britomart:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Both shew their anncestrie.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Redoubted knights, and honorable Dames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom I levell all my labours end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right sore I feare, least with unworthie blames</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This odious argument my rymes should shend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ought your goodly patience offend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles of a wanton Lady I doe write,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with her loose incontinence doth blend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The shyning glory of your soveraine light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And knighthood fowle defaced by a faithlesse knight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But never let th'ensample of the bad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Offend the good; for good, by paragone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of evill, may more notably be rad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As white seemes fayrer macht with blacke attone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne all are shamed by the fault of one:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For lo! in heven, whereas all goodnes is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emongst the Angels, a whole legione</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of wicked Sprightes did fall from happy blis;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What wonder then if one, of women all, did mis?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then listen, Lordings, if ye list to weet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cause why Satyrane and Paridell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mote not be entertaynd, as seemed meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into that Castle, (as that Squyre does tell.)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Therein a cancred crabbed Carle does dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That has no skill of Court nor courtesie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne cares what men say of him, ill or well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all his dayes he drownes in privitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet has full large to live and spend at libertie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But all his minde is set on mucky pelfe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hoord up heapes of evill gotten masse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which he others wrongs, and wreckes himselfe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet is he lincked to a lovely lasse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose beauty doth her bounty far surpasse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which to him both far unequall yeares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And also far unlike conditions has;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she does joy to play emongst her peares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to be free from hard restraynt and gealous feares.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But he is old, and withered like hay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unfit faire Ladies service to supply;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The privie guilt whereof makes him alway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Suspect her truth, and keepe continuall spy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon her with his other blincked eye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne suffreth he resort of living wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Approch to her, ne keepe her company,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in close bowre her mewes from all mens sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Depriv'd of kindly joy and naturall delight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Malbecco he, and Hellenore she hight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unfitly yokt together in one teeme.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is the cause why never any knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is suffred here to enter, but he seeme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as no doubt of him he neede misdeeme."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereat Sir Satyrane gan smyle, and say;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Extremely mad the man I surely deeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That weenes with watch and hard restraynt to stay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A womans will, which is disposd to go astray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"In vaine he feares that which he cannot shonne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For who wotes not, that womans subtiltyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can guylen Argus, when she list misdonne?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It is not yron bandes, nor hundred eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor brasen walls, nor many wakefull spyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That can withhold her wilfull wandring feet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But fast goodwill, with gentle courtesyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And timely service to her pleasures meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May her perhaps containe, that else would algates fleet."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Then is he not more mad," (sayd Paridell)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"That hath himselfe unto such service sold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In dolefull thraldome all his dayes to dwell?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For sure a foole I doe him firmely hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That loves his fetters, though they were of gold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But why doe wee devise of others ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whyles thus we suffer this same dotard old</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To keepe us out in scorne, of his owne will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rather do not ransack all, and him selfe kill?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Nay, let us first" (sayd Satyrane) "entreat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The man by gentle meanes to let us in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And afterwardes affray with cruell threat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere that we to effbrce it doe begin:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, if all fayle, we will by force it win,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke reward the wretch for his mesprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As may be worthy of his haynous sin."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That counsell pleasd: then Paridell did rise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the Castle gate approcht in quiet wise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whereat soft knocking entrance he desyrd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The good man selfe, which then the Porter playd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him answered, that all were now retyrd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto their rest, and all the keyes convayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto their maister, who in bed was layd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none him durst awake out of his dreme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therefore them of patience gently prayd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Paridell began to chaunge his theme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And threatned him with force and punishment extreme</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But all in vaine, for nought mote him relent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now so long before the wicket fast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They wayted, that the night was forward spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the faire welkin fowly overcast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan blowen up a bitter stormy blast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With showre and hayle so horrible and dred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That this faire many were compeld at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To fly for succour to a little shed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which beside the gate for swyne was ordered.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It fortuned, soone after they were gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another knight, whom tempest thither brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came to that Castle, and with earnest mone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as the rest, late entrance deare besought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, like so as the rest, he prayd for nought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For flatly he of entrance was refusd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sorely thereat he was displeased, and thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How to avenge himselfe so sore abusd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And evermore the Carle of courtesie accusd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, to avoyde th' intolerable stowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He was compeld to seeke some refuge neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to that shed, to shrowd him from the showre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He came, which full of guests he found whyleare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So as he was not let to enter there:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat he gan to wex exceeding wroth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And swore that he would lodge with them yfere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or them dislodge, all were they liefe or loth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so defyde them each, and so defyde them both.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Both were full loth to leave that needfull tent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both full loth in darkenesse to debate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet both full liefe him lodging to have lent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both full liefe his boasting to abate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But chiefely Paridell his hart did grate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To heare him threaten so despightfully,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if he did a dogge in kenell rate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That durst not barke; and rather had he dy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, when he was defyde, in coward corner ly.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho hastily remounting to his steed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He forth issew'd: like as a boystrous winde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which in th'earthes hollow caves hath long ben hid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shut up fast within her prisons blind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Makes the huge element, against her kinde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To move and tremble as it were aghast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill that it an issew forth may finde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then forth it breakes, and with his furious blast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Confounds both land and seas, and skyes doth overcast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Their steel-hed speares they strongly coucht, and met</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Together with impetuous rage and forse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with the terrour of their fierce affret</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They rudely drove to ground both man and horse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That each awhile lay like a sencelesse corse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Paridell sore brused with the blow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could not arise the counterchaunge to scorse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that young Squyre him reared from below;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then drew he his bright sword, and gan about him throw.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Satyrane forth stepping did them stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with faire treaty pacifide their yre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, when they were accorded from the fray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against that Castles Lord they gan conspire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To heape on him dew vengeaunce for his hire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They beene agreed; and to the gates they goe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To burn the same with unquenchable fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that uncurteous Carle, their commune foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To doe fowle death to die, or wrap in grievous woe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Malbecco, seeing them resolvd indeed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To flame the gates, and hearing them to call</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For fire in earnest, ran with fearfull speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to them calling from the castle wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besought them humbly him to beare withall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As ignorant of servants bad abuse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And slacke attendaunce unto straungers call.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The knights were willing all things to excuse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though nought belev'd, and entraunce late did not refuse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They beene ybrought into a comely bowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And servd of all things that mote needfull bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet secretly their hoste did on them lowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And welcomde more for feare then charitee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But they dissembled what they did not see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And welcomed themselves. Each gan undight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their garments wett, and weary armour free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To dry them selves by Vulcanes flaming light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke their lately bruzed parts to bring in plight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And eke that straunger knight emongst the rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was for like need enforst to disaray:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, whenas vailed was her lofty crest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her golden locks, that were in trammells gay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upbounden, did them selves adowne display</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And raught unto her heeles; like sunny beames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in a cloud their light did long time stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their vapour vaded, shewe their golden gleames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And through the persant aire shoote forth their azure streames.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Shee also dofte her heavy haberjeon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which the faire feature of her limbs did hyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her well-plighted frock, which she did won</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tucke about her short when she did ryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee low let fall, that flowd from her lanck syde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Downe to her foot with carelesse modestee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then of them all she plainly was espyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be a woman-wight, unwist to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fairest woman-wight that ever eie did see.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like as Bellona (being late returnd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From slaughter of the Giaunts conquered:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where proud Encelade, whose wide nosethrils burnd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With breathed flames, like to a furnace redd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Transfixed with her speare downe tombled dedd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From top of Hemus by him heaped hye;)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">H ath loosd her helmet from her lofty hedd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her Gorgonian shield gins to untye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From her lefte arme, to rest in glorious victorye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which whenas they beheld, they smitten were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With great amazement of so wondrous sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And each on other, and they all on her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stood gazing, as if suddein great affright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had them surprizd. At last, avizing right</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her goodly personage and glorious hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which they so much mistooke, they tooke delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In their first error, and yett still anew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With wonder of her beauty fed their hongry vew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet note their hongry vew be satisfide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But seeing still the more desir'd to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever firmely fixed did abide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In contemplation of divinitee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But most they mervaild at her chevalree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And noble prowesse, which they had approv'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That much they faynd to know who she mote bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet none of all them her thereof amov'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet every one her likte, and every one her lov'd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And Paridell, though partly discontent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his late fall and fowle indignity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was soone wonne his malice to relent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through gratious regard of her faire eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And knightly worth which he too late did try,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet tried did adore. Supper was dight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then they Malbecco prayd of courtesy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of his lady they might have the sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And company at meat, to doe them more delight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But he, to shifte their curious request,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan causen why she could not come in place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her erased helth, her late recourse to rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And humid evening ill for sicke folkes cace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But none of those excuses could take place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne would they eate till she in presence came.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee came in presence with right comely grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fairely them saluted, as became,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shewd her selfe in all a gentle courteous Dame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They sate to meat; and Satyrane his chaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was her before, and Paridell beside;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he him selfe sate looking still askaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst Britomart, and ever closely eide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir Satyrane, that glaurices might not glide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But his blinde eie, that sided Paridell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All his demeasnure from his sight did hide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On her faire face so did he feede his fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sent close messages of love to her at will.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And ever and anone, when none was ware,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With speaking lookes, that close embassage bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He rov'd at her, and told his secret care;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all that art he learned had of yore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne was she ignoraunt of that leud lore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in his eye his meaning wisely redd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with the like him aunswerd evermore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee sent at him one fyrie dart, whose hedd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Empoisned was with privy lust and gealous dredd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He from that deadly throw made no defence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to the wound his weake heart opened wyde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wicked engine through false influence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Past through his eies, and secretly did glyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into his heart, which it did sorely gryde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But nothing new to him was that same paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne paine at all; for he so ofte had tryde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The powre thereof, and lov'd so oft in vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thing of course he counted love to entertaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thenceforth to her he sought to intimate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His inward griefe, by meanes to him well knowne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now Bacchus fruit out of the silver plate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He on the table dasht, as overthrowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or of the fruitfull liquor overflowne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by the dauncing bubbles did divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or therein write to lett his love be showne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which well she redd out of the learned line:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sacrament prophane in mistery of wine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, when so of his hand the pledge she raught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The guilty cup she fained to mistake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in her lap did shed her idle draught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shewing desire her inward flame to slake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By such close signes they secret way did make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto their wils, and one eies watch escape:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two eies he needeth, for to watch and wake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who lovers will deceive. Thus was the ape,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By their faire handling, put into Malbeccoes cape.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now, when of meats and drinks they had their fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Purpose was moved by that gentle Dame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto those knights adventurous, to tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of deeds of armes which unto them became,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every one his kindred and his name.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Paridell, in whom a kindly pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of gratious speach and skill his words to frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abounded, being glad of so fitte tide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him to commend to her, thus spake, of al well eide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Troy, that art now nought but an idle name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in thine ashes buried low dost lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though whilome far much greater then thy fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before that angry Gods and cruell skie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon thee heapt a direfull destinie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What boots it boast thy glorious descent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fetch from heven thy great genealogie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith all thy worthie prayses being blent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their ofspring hath embaste, and later glory shent?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Most famous Worthy of the world, by whome</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That warre was kindled which did Troy inflame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stately towres of Ilion whilome</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Brought unto balefull ruine, was by name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir Paris far renowmd through noble fame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, through great prowesse and bold hardinesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From Lacedaemon fetcht the fayrest Dame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ever Greece did boast, or knight possesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom Venus to him gave for meed of worthinesse;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Fayre Helene, flowre of beautie excellent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And girlond of the mighty Conquerours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That madest many Ladies deare lament</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The heavie losse of their brave Paramours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which they far off beheld from Trojan toures,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saw the fieldes of faire Scamander strowne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With carcases of noble warrioures</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose fruitlesse lives were under furrow sowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Xanthus sandy bankes with blood all overflowne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"From him my linage I derive aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who long before the ten yeares siege of Troy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles yet on Ida he a shepeheard hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On faire Oenone got a lovely boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom, for remembrance of her passed joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She, of his Father, Parius did name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, after Greekes did Priams realme destroy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gathred the Trojan reliques sav'd from flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with them sayling thence to th' isle of Paros came.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"That was by him cald Paros, which before</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hight Nausa: there he many yeares did raine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And built Nausicle by the Pontick shore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which he dying lefte next in remaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Paridas his sonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whom I Paridell by kin descend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, for faire ladies love and glories gaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My native soile have lefte, my dayes to spend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In seewing deeds of armes, my lives and labors end."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whenas the noble Britomart heard tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Trojan warres and Priams citie sackt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The ruefull story of Sir Paridell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She was empassiond at that piteous act,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With zelous envy of Greekes cruell fact</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against that nation, from whose race of old</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She heard that she was lineally extract;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For noble-Britons .sprong from Trojans bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Troynovant was built of old Troyes ashes cold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then, sighing soft awhile, at last she thus:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O lamentable fal1 of famous towne!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which raignd so many yeares victorious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of all Asie bore the soveraine crowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In one sad night consumd and throwen downe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What stony hart, that heares thy haplesse fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is not empierst with deepe compassiowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And makes ensample of mans wretched state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That floures so fresh at morne, and fades at evening late?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Behold, Sir, how your pitifull complaint</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath fownd another partner of your payne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For nothing may impresse so deare constraint</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As countries cause, and commune foes disdayne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if it should not grieve you backe agayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To turne your course, I would to heare desyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What to Aeneas fell; sith that men sayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He was not in the cities wofull fyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Consum'd, but did him selfe to safety retyre."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Anchyses sonne, begott of Venus fayre,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said he, "out of the flames for safegard fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with a remnant did to sea repayre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where he through fatall errour long was led</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full many yeares, and weetlesse wandered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From shore to shore emongst the Lybick sandes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere rest he fownd. Much there he suffered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many perilles past in forreine landes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To save his people sad from victours vengefull handes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"At last in Latium he did arryve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where he with cruell warre was entertaind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of th' inland folke, which sought him backe to drive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till he with old Latinus was constraind Canto</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To contract wedlock, (so the fates ordaind)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wedlocke contract in blood, and eke in blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Accomplished, that many deare complaind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rivall slaine, the viclour, through the flood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Escaped hardly, hardly praisd his wedlock good.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Yet, after all, he victour did survive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with Latinus did the kingdom part;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But after, when both nations gan to strive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into their names the title to convart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His sonne lulus did from thence depart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all the warlike youth of Trojans bloud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in long Alba plast his throne apart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where faire it florished and long time stoud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till Romulus, renewing it, to Rome remoud."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"There; there," (said Britomart) "afresh appeard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The glory of the later world to spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Troy againe out of her dust was reard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sitt in second seat of soveraine king</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the world, under her governing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But a third kingdom yet is to arise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the Trojans scattered ofspring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in all glory and great enterprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both first and second Troy shall dare to equalise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"It Troynovant is hight, that with the waves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of wealthy Thamis washed is along,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon whose stubborne neck, (whereat he raves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With roring rage, and sore him selfe does throng)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all men feare to tempt his billowes strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She fastned hath her foot; which stands so hy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it a wonder of the world is song</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In forreine lands; and all which passen by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beholding it from farre, doe thinke it threates the skye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"The Trojan Brute did first that citie fownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Hygate made the meare thereof by West,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Overt gate by North that is the bownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Toward the land; two rivers bownd the rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So huge a scope at first him seemed best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be the compasse of his kingdomes seat:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So huge a mind could not in lesser rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne in small meares containe his glory great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Albion had conquered first by warlike feat."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ah! fairest Lady knight," (said Paridell)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Pardon, I pray, my heedlesse oversight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who had forgot that whylome I heard tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From aged Mnemon; for my wits beene light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Indeed he said, (if I remember right)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of the antique Trojan stocke there grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another plant, that raught to wondrous hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And far abroad his mightie braunches threw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the utmost Angle of the world he knew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"For that same Brute, whom much he did advaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In all his speach, was Sylvius his sonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom having slain through luckles arrowes glaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He fled for feare of that he had misdonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or els for shame, so fowle reproch to shonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with him ledd to sea an youthly trayne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where wearie wandring they long time did wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many fortunes prov'd in th' Ocean mayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And great adventures found, that now were long to sayne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"At last by fatall course they driven were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into an Island spatious and brode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The furthest North that did to them appeare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, after rest, they, seeking farre abrode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Found it the fittest soyle for their abode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fruitfull of all thinges fitt for living foode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wholy waste and void of peoples trode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save an huge nation of the Geaunts broode</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That fed on living flesh, and dronck mens vitall blood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Whom he, through wearie wars and labours long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Subdewd with losse of many Britons bold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which the great Goemagot of strong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Corineus, and Coulin of Debon old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were overthrowne and laide on th'earth full cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which quaked under their so hideous masse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A famous history to bee enrold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In everlasting moniments of brasse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all the antique Worthies merits far did passe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"His worke great Troynovant, his worke is eke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Lincolne, both renowmed far away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That who from East to West will endlong seeke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cannot two fairer Cities find this day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Except Cleopolis: so heard I say</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Old Mnemon. Therefore, Sir, I greet you well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your countrey kin; and you entyrely pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of pardon for the strife, which late befell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Betwixt us both unknowne." So ended Paridell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But all the while that he these speeches spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his lips hong faire Dame Hellenore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With vigilant regard and dew attent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fashioning worldes of fancies evermore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In her fraile witt, that now her quite forlore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles unwares away her wondring eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And greedy eares her weake hart from her bore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he perceiving, ever privily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In speaking many false belgardes at her let fly.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So long these knights discoursed diversly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of straunge affaires, and noble hardiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which they had past with mickle jeopardy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That now the humid night was farforth spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hevenly lampes were halfendeale ybrent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which th'old man seeing wel, who too long thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Every discourse, and every argument,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which by the houres he measured, besought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Them go to rest. So all unto their bowres were brought.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-10" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Paridell rapeth Hellenore:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Malbecco her pursewes:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Findes emongst Satyres whence with him</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To tume she doth refuse.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The morow next, so soone as Phoebus Lamp</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bewrayed had the world with early light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fresh Aurora had the shady damp</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the goodly heven amoved quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Britomart and that same Faery knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uprose, forth on their journey for to wend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Paridell complaynd, that his late fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Britomart so sore did him offend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ryde he could not, till his hurts he did amend.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So foorth they far'd; but he behind them stayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Maulgre his host, who grudged grievously</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To house a guest that would be needes obayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of his owne him lefte not liberty:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might wanting measure moveth surquedry.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two things he feared, but the third was death;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That fiers youngmans unruly maystery;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His money, which he lov'd as living breath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his faire wife, whom honest long he kept uneath.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But patience perforce, he must able</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What fortune and his fate on him will lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fond is the feare that findes no remedie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet warily he watcheth every way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which he feareth evill happen may;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So th'evill thinkes by watching to prevent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne doth he suffer her, nor night nor day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of his sight her selfe once to absent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So doth he punish her, and eke him selfe torment.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Paridell kept better watch then hee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A fit occasion for his turne to finde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">False love! why do men say thou canst not see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in their foolish fancy feigne thee blinde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with thy charmes the sharpest sight doest binde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to thy will abuse? Thou walkest free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seest every secret of the minde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou seest all, yet none at all sees thee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All that is by the working of thy Deitee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So perfedl in that art was Paridell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he Malbeccoes halfen eye did wyle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His halfen eye he wiled wondrous well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Hellenors both eyes did eke beguyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both eyes and hart attonce, during the whyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he there sojourned his woundes to heale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Cupid selfe, it seeing, close did smyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet how he her love away did steale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bad that none their joyous treason should reveale.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The learned lover lost no time nor tyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That least avantage mote to him afford,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet bore so faire a sayle, that none espyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His secret drift, till he her layd abord.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When so in open place and commune bord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He fortun'd her to meet, with commune speach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He courted her; yet bayted every word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That his ungentle hoste n'ote him appeach</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of vile ungentlenesse, or hospitages breach.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when apart (if ever her apart)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He found, then his false engins fast he plyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the sleights unbosomd in his hart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He sigh'd, he sobd, he swownd, he perdy dyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cast himselfe on ground her fast besyde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, when againe he him bethought to live,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He wept, and wayld, and false laments belyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saying, but if she Mercie would him give,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he mote algates dye, yet did his death forgive.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And otherwhyles with amorous delights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pleasing toyes he would her entertaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now singing sweetly to surprize her sprights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now making layes of love and lovers paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bransles, Ballads, virelayes, and verses vaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oft purposes, oft riddles, he devysd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thousands like which flowed in his braine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which he fed her fancy, and entysd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To take to his new love, and leave her old despysd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And every where he might, and everie while,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He did her service dewtifull, and sewd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At hand with humble pride and pleasing guile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So closely yet, that none but she it vewd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who well perceived all, and all indewd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus finely did he his false nets dispred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which he many weake harts had subdewd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of yore, and many had ylike misled:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What wonder then, if she were likewise carried?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>No fort so fensible, no wals so strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that continuall battery will rive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or daily siege, through dispiirvayaunce long</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lacke of reskewes, will to parley drive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Peece, that unto parley eare will give,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will shortly yield it selfe, and will be made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The vassall of the victors will bylive:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That stratageme had oftentimes assayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This crafty Paramoure, and now it plaine displayed:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For through his traines he, her intrapped hath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she her love and hart hath wholy sold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To him, without regard of gaine or scath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or care of credite, or of husband old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom she hath vow'd to dub a fayre Cucquold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nought wants but time and place, which shortly shee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Devized hath, and to her lover told.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It pleased well: So well they both agree:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So readie rype to ill ill wemens counsels bee!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Darke was the Evening, fit for lovers stealth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When chaunst Malbecco busie be elsewhere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She to his closet went, where all his wealth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lay hid; thereof she countlesse summes did reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which she meant away with her to beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rest she fyr'd, for sport, or for despight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Hellene, when she saw aloft appeare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Trojane flames and reach to hevens hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did clap her hands, and joyed at that dolefull sight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This second Helene, fay re Dame Hellenore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles her husband ran with sory haste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To quench the flames which she had tyn'd before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Laught at his foolish labour spent in waste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ran into her lovers armes right fast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where streight embraced she to him did cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And call alowd for helpe, ere helpe were past;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For lo! that Guest did beare her forcibly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And meant to ravish her, that rather had to dy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The wretched man hearing her call for ayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ready seeing him with her to fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his disquiet mind was much dismayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when againe he backeward cast his eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saw the wicked fire so furiously</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Consume his hart, and scorch his Idoles face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He was therewith distressed diversely,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne wist he how to turne, nor to what place:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was never wretched man in such a wofull cace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ay when to him she cryde, to her he turnd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And left the fire; love money overcame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when he marked how his money burnd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He left his wife; money did love disclame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both was he loth to loose his loved Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And loth he leave his liefest pelfe behinde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, sith he n'ote save both, he sav'd that same</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which was the dearest to his dounghill minde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The God of his desire, the joy of misers blinde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus whilest all things in troublous uprore were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all men busie to suppresse the flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The loving couple neede no reskew feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But leasure had and liberty to frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their purpost flight, free from all mens reclame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Night, the patronesse of love-stealth fay re,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gave them safe conduct, till to end they came.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So beene they gone yfere, a wanton payre</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of lovers loosely knit, where list them to repayre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as the cruell flames yslaked were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Malbecco, seeing how his losse did lye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the flames which he had quencht whylere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into huge waves of griefe and gealosye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full deepe emplonged was, and drowned nye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Twixt inward doole and felonous despight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He rav'd, he wept, he stampt, he lowd did cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the passions that in man may light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did him attonce oppresse, and vex his caytive spright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Long thus he chawd the cud of inward griefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did consume his gall with anguish sore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still when he mused on his late mischiefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then still the smart thereof increased more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seemd more grievous then it was before.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last when sorrow he saw booted nought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne griefe might not his love to him restore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan devise how her he reskew mought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ten thousand wayes he cast in his confused thought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last resolving, like a Pilgrim pore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To search her forth where so she might be fond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bearing with him treasure in close store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rest jiejeaves in ground: So takes in hond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke her endlong both by sea and lond.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long he her sought, he sought her far and nere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every where that he mote understond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of knights and ladies any meetings were;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of each one he mett he tidings did inquere.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But all in vaine: his woman was too wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ever to come into his clouch againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hee too simple ever to surprise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The jolly Paridell, for all his paine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One day, as hee forpassed by the plaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With weary pace, he far away espide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A couple, seeming well to be his twaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which hoved close under a forest side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if they lay in wait, or els them selves did hide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Well weened hee that those the same mote bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as he better did their shape avize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him seemed more their maner did agree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For th'one was armed all in warlike wize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom to be Paridell he did devize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And th'other, al yclad in garments light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Discolourd like to womanish disguise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He did resemble to his lady bright;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ever his faint hart much earned at the sight:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And ever faine he towards them would goe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yet durst not for dread approchen nie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But stood aloofe, unweeting what to doe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that prickt forth with loves extremity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is the father of fowle gealosy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He closely nearer crept the truth to weet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, as he nigher drew, he easily</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might scerne that it was not his sweetest sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne yet her Belamour, the partner of his sheet:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But it was scornefull Braggadochip,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with his servant Trompart hoverd there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith late he fled from his too earnest foe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom such whenas Malbecco spyed clere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He turned backe, and would have fled arere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till Trompart, ronning hastely, him did stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bad before his soveraine Lord appere.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was him loth, yet durst he not gainesay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And comming him before low louted on the lay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Boaster at him sternely bent his browe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if he could have kild him with his looke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to the ground him meekely made to bowe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And awfull terror deepe into him strooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That every member of his body quooke.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said he, "Thou man of nought, what doest thou here</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unfitly furnisht with thy bag and booke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where I expected one with shield and spere</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To prove some deeds of armes upon an equall pere?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The wretched man at his imperious speach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was all abasht, and low prostrating said:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Good Sir, let not my rudenes be no breach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto your patience, ne be ill ypaid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For I un wares this way by fortune straid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A silly Pilgrim driven to distresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seeke a Lady"—There he suddein staid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did the rest with grievous sighes suppresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While teares stood in his eies, few drops of bitternesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"What Lady, man?" (said Trompart) "take good hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tell thy griefe, if any hidden lye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was never better time to shew thy smart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then now that noble succor is thee by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is the whole worlds commune remedy."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That chearful word his weak heart much did cheare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with vaine hope his spirits faint supply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That bold he sayd; "O most redoubted Pere!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vouchsafe with mild regard a wretches cace to heare."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then sighing sore, "It is not long," (saide hee)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Sith I enjoyd the gentlest Dame alive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whom a knight, no knight at all perdee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But shame of all that doe for honor strive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By treacherous deceipt did me deprive:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through open outrage he her bore away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with fowle force unto his will did drive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which al good knights, that armes doe bear this day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are bownd for to revenge, and punish if they may.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And you, most noble Lord, that can and dare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Redresse the wrong of miserable wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cannot employ your most victorious speare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In better quarell then defence of right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for a Lady gainst a faithlesse knight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So shall your glory bee advaunced much,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all faire Ladies magnify your might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke my selfe, albee I simple such,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your worthy paine shall wel reward with guerdon rich."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that out of his bouget forth he drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great store of treasure, therewith him to tempt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he on it lookt scornefully askew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As much disdeigning to be so misdempt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">, Or a war-monger to be basely nempt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sayd; "Thy offers base I greatly loth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arid eke thy words uncourteous and unkempt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I tread in dust thee and thy money both,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, were it not for shame" So turned from him wroth.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Trompart, that his maistres humor knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In lofty looks to hide an humble minde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was inly tickled with that golden vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his eare him rownded close behinde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet stoupt he not, but lay still in the winde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Waiting advauntage on the pray to sease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till Trompart, lowly to the grownd inclinde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besought him his great corage to appease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pardon simple man that rash did him displease.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Big looking like a doughty Doucepere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last he thus; "Thou clod of vilest clay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I pardon yield, and with thy rudenes beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But weete henceforth, that all that golden pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all that els the vaine world vaunten may,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I loath as doung, ne deeme my dew reward:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fame is my meed, and glory vertues pay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But minds of mortall men are muchell mard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mov'd amisse with massy mucks unmeet regard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And more: I graunt to thy great misery</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gratious respect; thy wife shall backe be sent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that vile knight, who ever that he bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which hath thy lady reft and knighthood shent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By Sanglamort my sword, whose deadly dent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The blood hath of so many thousands shedd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I sweare, ere long shall dearely it repent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne he twixt heven and earth shall hide his hedd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But soone he shal be fownd, and shortly doen be dedd."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The foolish man thereat woxe wondrous blith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if the word so spoken were halfe donne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And humbly thanked him a thousand sith</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That had from death to life him newly wonne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho forth the Boaster marching brave begonne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His stolen steed to thunder furiously,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if he heaven and hell would over-ronne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the world confound with cruelty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That much Malbecco joyed in his jollity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus long they three together traveiled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through many a wood and many an uncouth way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke his wife that was far wandered:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But those two sought nought but the present pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weete, the treasure which he did bewray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which their eies and harts were wholly sett,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With purpose how they might it best betray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, sith the howre that first he did them lett</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The same behold, therwith their keene desires were whett.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It fortuned, as they together far'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They spide where Paridell came pricking fast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the plaine; the which him selfe prepar'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To giust with that brave straunger knight a cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As on adventure by the way he past.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alone he rode without his Paragone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, having, filcht her bells, her up he cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the wide world, and lett her fly alone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He nould be clogd. So had he served many one.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The gentle Lady, loose at randon lefte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The greene-wood long did walke, and wander wide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At wilde adventure, like a forlorne wefte;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till on a day the Satyres her espide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Straying alone withouten groome or guide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her up they tooke, and with them home her ledd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With them as housewife ever to abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To milk their gotes, and make them cheese and bredd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every one as commune good her handeled:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That shortly she Malbecco has forgott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke Sir Paridell, all were he deare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who from her went to seeke another lott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now by fortune was arrived here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where those two guilers with Malbecco were.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone as the old man saw Sir Paridell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He fainted, and was almost dead with feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne word he had to speake his griefe to tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to him louted low, and greeted goodly well;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, after, asked him for Hellenore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"I take no keepe of her," (sayd Paridell)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"She wonneth in the forrest there before."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So forth he rode as his adventure fell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles the Boaster from his loftie sell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faynd to alight, something amisse to mend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the fresh Swayne would not his leasure dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But went his way: whom when he passed kend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He up remounted light, and after faind to wend.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Perdy, nay," (said Malbecco) "shall ye not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But let him passe as lightly as he came:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For litle good of him is to be got,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mickle perill to bee put to shame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But let us goe to seeke my dearest Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom he hath left in yonder forest wyld;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For of her safety in great doubt I ame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least salvage beastes her person have despoyld:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then all the world is lost, and we in vaine have toyld."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They all agree, and forward them addresse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ah! but," (said crafty Trompart) "weete ye well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That yonder in that wastefull wildernesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Huge monsters haunt, and many dangers dwell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dragons, and Minotaures, and feendes of hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many wilde woodmen which robbe and rend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All traveilers: therefore advise ye well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before ye enterprise that way to wend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One may his journey bring too soone to evill end."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Malbecco stopt in great astonishment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with pale eyes fast fixed on the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their counsell crav'd in daunger imminent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said Trompart; "You, that are the most opprest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With burdein of great treasure, I thinke best</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here for to stay in safetie behynd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Lord and I will search the wide forest."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That counsell pleased not Malbeccoes mynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he was much afraid him selfe alone to fynd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Then is it best," (said he) "that ye doe leave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your treasure here in some security,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Either fast closed in some hollow greave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or buried in the ground from jeopardy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till we returne againe in safety:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As for us two, least doubt of us ye have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hence farre away we will blyndfolded ly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne privy bee unto your treasures grave."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It pleased; so he did. Then they march forward brave.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now, when amid the thickest woodes they were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They heard a noyse of many bagpipes shrill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shrieking Hububs them approching nere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which all the forest did with horrour fill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That dreadfull sound the bosters hart did thrill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With such amazment, that in hast he fledd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever looked back for good or ill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after him eke fearefull Trompart spedd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The old man could not fly, but fell to ground half dedd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet afterwardes, close creeping as he might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He in a bush did hyde his fearefull hedd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The jolly Satyres, full of fresh delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came dauncing forth, and with them nimbly ledd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Helenore with girlonds all bespredd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom their May-lady they had newly made:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She, proude of that new honour which they redd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of their lovely fellowship full glade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Daunst lively, and her face did with a Lawrell shade.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The silly man that in the thickett lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saw all this goodly sport, and grieved sore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet durst he not against it doe or say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But did his hart with bitter thoughts engore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see th'unkindnes of his Hellenore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All day they daunced with great lusty-hedd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with their horned feet the greene gras wore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles their Gotes upon the brouzes fedd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till drouping Phoebus gan to hyde his golden hedd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho up they gan their mery pypes to trusse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all their goodly heardes did gather rownd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But every Satyre first did give a busse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Hellenore; so busses did abound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now gan the humid vapour shed the grownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With perly deaw, and th' Earthes gloomy shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did dim the brightnesse of the welkin rownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That every bird and beast awarned made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To shrowd themselves, whiles sleepe their sences did invade.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when Malbecco saw, out of the bush</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his handes and feete he crept full light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And like a Gote emongst the Gotes did rush;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, through the helpe of his faire homes on hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And misty dampe of misconceyving night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke through likenesse of his gotish beard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He did the better counterfeite aright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So home he marcht emongst the horned heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That none of all the Satyres him espyde or heard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At night, when all they went to sleepe, he vewd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereas his lovely wife emongst them lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Embraced of a Satyre rough and rude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who all the night did minde his joyous play:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nine times he heard him come aloft ere day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all his hart with gealosy did swell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yet that nights ensample did bewray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That not for nought his wife them loved so well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When one so oft a night did ring his matins bell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So closely as he could he to them crept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When wearie of their sport to sleepe they fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to his wife, that now full soundly slept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He whispered in her eare, and did her tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it was he which by her side did dwell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therefore prayd her wake to heare him plaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one out of a dreame not waked well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She turnd her, and returned backe againe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet her for to awake he did the more constraine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last with irkesom trouble she abrayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then perceiving that it was indeed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her old Malbecco, which did her upbrayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With loosenesse of her love and loathly deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She was astonisht with exceeding dreed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And would have wakt the Satyre by her syde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he her prayd, for mercy or for meed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To save his life, ne let him be descryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But hearken to his lore, and all his counsell hyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho gan he her perswade to leave that lewd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And loathsom life, of God and man abhord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And home returne, where all should be renewd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With perfect peace and bandes of fresh accord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And she receivd againe to bed and bord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if no trespas ever had beene donne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she it all refused at one word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by no meanes would to his will be wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But chose emongst the jolly Satyres still to wonhe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He wooed her till day-spring he espyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all in vaine; and then turnd to the heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who butted him with homes on every syde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And trode downe in the durt, where his hore beard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was fowly dight, and he of death afeard.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Early, before the heavens fairest light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the ruddy East was fully reard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The heardes out of their foldes were loosed quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he emongst the rest crept forth in sory plight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So soone as he the Prison-dore did pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He ran as fast as both his feet could beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And never looked who behind him was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne scarsely who before: like as a Beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That creeping close amongst the hives to reare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An hony-combe, the wakefull dogs espy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him assayling sore his carkas teare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hardly he with life away does fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne stayes, till safe him selfe he see from jeopardy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne stayd he, till he came unto the place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where late his treasure he entombed had;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where when he found it not, (for Trompart bace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had it purloyned for his maister bad)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With extreme fury he became quite mad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ran away, ran with him selfe away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That who so straungely had him scene bestadd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With upstart haire and staring eyes dismay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Limbo lake him late escaped sure would say.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>High over hilles and over dales he fledd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if the wind him on his winges had borne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne banck nor bush could stay him, when he spedd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His nimble feet, as treading still on thorne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Griefe, and despight, and gealosy, and scorne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did all the way him follow hard behynd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he himselfe himselfe loath'd so forlorne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So shamefully forlorne of womankynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, as a Snake, still lurked in his wounded mynd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Still fled he forward, looking backward still;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne stayd his flight nor fearefull agony,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that he came unto a rocky hill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over the sea suspended dreadfully,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That living creature it would terrify</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To looke adowne, or upward to the hight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From thence he threw him selfe despiteously,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All desperate of his fore-damned spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That seemd no help for him was left in living sight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But through long anguish and selfe-murdring thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He was so wasted and forpined quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all his substance was consum'd to nought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And nothing left but like an aery Spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That on the rockes he fell so flit and light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he thereby receiv'd no hurt at all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But chaunced on a craggy cliff to light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence he with crooked clawes so long did crall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That at the last he found a cave with entrance small.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Into the same he creepes, and thenceforth there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Resolv'd to build his balefull mansion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In drery darkenes and continuall feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that rocks fall, which ever and anon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Threates with huge ruine him to fall upon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he dare never sleepe, but that one eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still ope he keepes for that occasion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever rests he in tranquillity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The roring billowes beat his bowre so boystrously.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne ever is he wont on ought to feed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But todes and frogs, his pasture poysonous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which in his cold complexion doe breed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A filthy blood, or humour rancorous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Matter of doubt and dread suspitious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That doth with curelesse care consume the hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Corrupts the stomacke with gall vitious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cros-cuts the liver with internall smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And doth transfixe the soule with deathes eternall dart.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet can he never dye, but dying lives,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doth himselfe with sorrow new sustaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That death and life attonce unto him gives,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And painefull pleasure turnes to pleasing paine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There dwels he ever, miserable swain e,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hatefull both to him selfe and every wight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where he, through privy griefe and horrour vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is woxen so deform' d that he has quight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgot he was a man, and Gelosy is hight.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-11" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Britomart chaceth Ollyphant;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Findes Scudamour distrest:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Assayes the house of Busurane,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Where Loves spoyles are exprest.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>O hatefull hellish Snake! what furie furst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Brought thee from balefull house of Proserpine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where in her bosome she thee long had nurst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fostred up with bitter milke of tine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fowle Gealosy! that turnest love divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To joylesse dread, and mak'st the loving hart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hatefull thoughts to languish and to pine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And feed it selfe with selfe-consuming smart?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the passions in the mind thou vilest art!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O! let him far be banished away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his stead let Love for ever dwell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sweete Love, that doth his golden wings embay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In blessed Neftar and pure Pleasures well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untroubled of vile feare or bitter fell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ye, faire Ladies, that your kingdomes.make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In th' harts of men, them governe wisely well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of faire Britomart ensample take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That was as trew in love as Turtle to her make.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who with Sir Satyrane, as earst ye red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth ryding from Malbeccoes hostlesse hous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far off aspyde a young man, the which fled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From an huge Geaunt, that with hideous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hatefull outrage long him chaced thus;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It was that Ollyphant, the brother deare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that Argante vile and vitious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whom the Squyre of Dames was reft whylere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This all as bad as she, and worse, if worse ought were.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For as the sister did in feminine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And filthy lust exceede all womankinde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So he surpassed his sex masculine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In beastly use, all that I ever finde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when as Britomart beheld behinde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fearefull boy so greedily poursew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She was emmoved in her noble minde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T'employ her puissaunce to his reskew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pricked fiercely forward where she did him vew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne was Sir Satyrane her far behinde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with like fiercenesse did ensew the chace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when the Gyaunt saw, he soone resinde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His former suit, and from them fled apace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They after both, and boldly bad him bace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And each did strive the other to outgoe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he them both outran a wondrous space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he was long, and swift as any Roe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now made better speed t'escape his feared foe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It was not Satyrane, whom he did feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Britomart the flowre of chastity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he the powre of chaste hands might not beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But alwayes did their dread encounter fly:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now so fast his feet he did apply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he has gotten to a forrest neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where he is shrowded in security.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wood they enter, and search everie where;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They searched diversely, so both divided were.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Fayre Britomart so long him followed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she at last came to a fountaine sheare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which there lay a knight all wallowed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the grassy ground, and by him neare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His haberjeon, his helmet, and his speare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A little off his shield was rudely throwne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which the winged boy in colours cleare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Depemfted was, full easie to be knowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he thereby, where ever it in field was showne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His face upon the grownd did groveling ly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if he had beene slombring in the shade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the brave Mayd would not for courtesy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of his quiet slomber him abrade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor seeme too suddeinly him to invade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still as she stood, she heard with grievous throb</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him grone, as if his hart were peeces made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with most painefull pangs to sigh and sob,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That pitty did the Virgins hart of patience rob.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last forth breaking into bitter plaintes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He sayd; "O soverayne Lord! that sit'st on hye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And raignst in blis emongst thy blessed Saintes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How suffrest thou such shamefull cruelty</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So long unwreaked of thine enimy?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or hast thou, Lord, of good mens cause no heed?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or doth thy justice sleepe and silent ly?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What booteth then the good and righteous deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If goodnesse find no grace, nor righteousnes no meed?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"If good find grace, and righteousnes reward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why then is Amoret in caytive band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith that more bounteous creature never far'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On foot upon the face of living land?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or if that hevenly justice may withstand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wrongfull outrage of unrighteous men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why then is Busirane with wicked hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Suffred, these seven monethes day, in secret den</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Lady and my love so cruelly to pen!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"My Lady and my love is cruelly pend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In dolefull darkenes from the vew of day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilest deadly torments doe her chast brest rend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the sharpe steele doth rive her hart in tway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All for she Scudamore will not denay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet thou, vile man, vile Scudamore, art sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne canst her ayde, ne canst her foe dismay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unworthy wretch to tread upon the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For whom so faire a Lady feeles so sore a wound!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There an huge heape of singults did oppresse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His strugling soule, and swelling throbs empeach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His foltring toung with pangs of drerinesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Choking the remnant of his plaintife speach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if his dayes were come to their last reach:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when she heard, and saw the ghastly fit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Threatning into his life to make a breach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both with great ruth and terrour she was smit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fearing least from her cage the wearie soule would flit.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho stouping downe she him amoved light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, therewith somewhat starting, up gan looke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seeing him behind a stranger knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereas no living creature he mistooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With great indignaunce he that sight forsooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, downe againe himselfe disdainfully</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abjecting, th'earth with his faire forhead strooke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which the bold Virgin seeing gan apply</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fit medcine to his griefe, and spake thus courtesly:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ah gentle knight! whose deepe conceived griefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well seemes t'exceede the powre of patience,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, if that hevenly grace some goode reliefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You send, submit you to high providence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever in your noble hart prepense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the sorrow in the world is lesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then vertues might and values confidence:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For who nill bide the burden of distresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must not here thinke to live; for life is wretchednesse</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Therefore, faire Sir, doe comfort to you take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And freely read what wicked felon so</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath outrag'd you, and thrald your gentle make.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perhaps this hand may helpe to ease your woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wreake your sorrow on your cruell foe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At least it faire endevour will apply."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those feeling words so neare the quicke did goe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That up his head he reared easily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, leaning on his elbowe, these few words lett fly.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"What boots it plaine that cannot be redrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sow vaine sorrow in a fruitlesse eare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith powre of hand, nor skill of learned brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne worldly price, cannot redeeme my deare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of her thraldome and continuall feare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he, the tyrant, which her hath in ward</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By strong enchauntments and blacke Magicke leare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath in a dungeon deepe her close embard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many dreadfull feends hath pointed to her gard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"There he tormenteth her most terribly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And day and night afflifts with mortall paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because to yield him love she doth deny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Once to me yold, not to be yolde againe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yet by torture he would her constraine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Love to conceive in her disdainfull brest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till so she doe, she must in doole remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne may by living meanes be thence relest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What boots it then to plaine that cannot be redrest?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With this sad hersall of his heavy stresse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The warlike Damzell was empassiond sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sayd; "Sir knight, your cause is nothing lesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then is your sorrow certes, if not more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For nothing so much pitty doth implore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As gentle Ladyes helplesse misery:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yet, if please ye listen to my lore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I will, with proofe of last extremity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deliver her fro thence, or with her for you dy."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ah! gentlest knight alive," (sayd Scudamore)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"What huge heroicke magnanimity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dwells in thy bounteous brest! what couldst thou more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If shee were thine, and thou as now am I?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O! spare thy happy daies, and them apply</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To better boot; but let me die that ought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More is more losse; one is enough to dy."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Life is not lost," (said she) "for which is bought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endlesse renowm, that, more then death, is to be sought."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus shee at length persuaded him to rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with her wend to see what new successe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mote him befall upon new enterprise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His armes, which he had vowed to disprofesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She gathered up and did about him dresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his forwandred steed unto him gott:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So forth they forth yfere make their progresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And march not past the mountenaunce of a shott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till they arriv'd whereas their purpose they did plott.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There they dismounting drew their weapons bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stoutly came unto the Castle gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereas no gate they found them to withhold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor ward to waite at morne and evening late;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in the Porch, that did them sore amate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A flaming fire, ymixt with smouldry smoke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stinking sulphure, that with griesly hate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dreadfull horror did all entraunce choke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enforced them their forward footing to revoke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Greatly thereat was Britomart dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne in that stownd wist how her selfe to beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For daunger vaine it were to have assayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That cruell element, which all things feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne none can suffer to approchen neare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, turning backe to Scudamour, thus sayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"What monstrous enmity provoke we heare?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Foolhardy as th' Earthes children, the which made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Batteill against the Gods, so we a God invade.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Daunger without discretion to attempt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Inglorious, beastlike is: therefore, Sir knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A read what course of you is safest dempt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And how we with our foe may come to fight."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"This is" (quoth he) "the dolorous despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which earst to you I playnd: for neither may</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This fire be quencht by any witt or might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne yet by any meanes remov'd away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So mighty be th'enchauntments which the same do stay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"What is there ells but cease these fruitlesse paines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And leave me to my former languishing?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Amorett must dwell in wicked chaines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Scudamore here die with sorrowing."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Perdy not so," (saide shee) "for shameful thing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yt were t'abandon noble chevisaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For shewe of perill, without venturing:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rather let try extremities of chaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then enterprised praise for dread to disavaunce."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith, resolv'd to prove her utmost might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her ample shield she threw before her face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her swords point directing forward right</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Assayld the flame; the which eftesoones gave place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did it selfe divide with equall space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That through she passed, as a thonder bolt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perceth the yielding ayre, and doth displace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The soring clouds into sad showres ymolt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So to her yold the flames, and did their force revolt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom whenas Scudamour saw past the fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Safe and untoucht, he likewise gan assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With greedy will and envious desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bad the stubborne flames to yield him way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But cruell Mulciber would not obay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His threatfull pride, but did the more augment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mighty rage, and with imperious sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him forst, (maulgre) his fercenes to relent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And backe retire, all scorcht and pittifully brent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With huge impatience he inly swelt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More for great sorrow that he could not pas</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then for the burning torment which he felt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with fell woodnes he effierced was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wilfully him throwing on the gras</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did beat and bounse his head and brest ful sore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles the Championesse now entred has</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The utmost rowme, and past the foremost dore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The utmost rowme abounding with all precious store:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For round about the walls yclothed were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With goodly arras of great majesty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Woven with gold and silke, so close and nere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the rich metall lurked privily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As faining to be hidd from envious eye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet here, and there, and every where, unwares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It shewd it selfe and shone unwillingly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like a discolourd Snake, whose hidden snares</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the greene gras his long bright burnisht back declares.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And in those Tapets weren fashioned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Many faire pourtraicts, and many a faire feate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all of love, and al of lusty-hed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As seemed by their semblaunt, did entreat:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke all Cupids warres they did repeate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cruell battailes, which he whilome fought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst all the Gods to make his empire great;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besides the huge massacres, which he wrought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On mighty kings and kesars into thraldome brought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therein was writt how often thondring Jove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had felt the point of his hart-percing dart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, leaving heavens kingdome, here did rove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In straunge disguize, to slake his scalding smart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now, like a Ram, faire Helle to pervart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now, like a Bull, Europa to withdraw:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah! how the fearefull Ladies tender hart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did lively seeme to tremble, when she saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The huge seas under her t'obay her servaunts law.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone after that, into a golden showre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him selfe he chaung'd, faire Danae to vew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through the roofe of her strong brasen towre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did raine into her lap an hony dew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles her foolish garde, that litle knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of such deceipt, kept th'yron dore fast bard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And watcht that none should enter nor issew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vaine was the watch, and bootlesse all the ward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whenas the God to golden hew him selfe transfard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then was he turnd into a snowy Swan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To win faire Leda to his lovely trade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O wondrous skill! and sweet wit of the man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her in daffadillies sleeping made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From scorching heat her daintie limbes to shade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles the proud Bird, ruffing his fethers wyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And brushing his faire brest, did her invade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She slept; yet twixt her eielids closely spyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How towards her he rusht, and smiled at his pryde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then shewd it how the Thebane Semelee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deceivd of gealous Juno, did require</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see him in his soverayne majestee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Armd with his thunderbolts and lightning fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whens dearely she with death bought her desire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But faire Alcmena better match did make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Joying his love in likenes more entire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Three nights in one, they say, that for her sake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He then did put, her pleasures lenger to partake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Twise was he scene in soaring Eagles shape,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with wide winges to beat the buxome ayre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Once, when he with Asterie did scape;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Againe, when as the Trojane boy so fay re</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He snatcht from Ida hill, and with him bare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wondrous delight it was there to behould</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How the rude Shepheards after him did stare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Trembling through feare least down he fallen should,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And often to him calling to take surer hould.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In Satyres shape Antiopa he snatcht;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And like a fire, when he Aegin' assayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A shepeheard, when Mnemosyne he catcht;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And like a Serpent to the Thracian mayd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whyles thus on earth great Jove these pageaunts playd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The winged boy did thrust into his throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And scoffing thus unto his mother sayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Lo! now the hevens obey to me alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And take me for their Jove, whiles Jove to earth is gone."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And thou, faire Phoebus, in thy colours bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wast there enwoven, and the sad distresse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which that boy thee plonged, for despight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That thou bewray'dst his mothers wantonnesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When she with Mars was meynt in joyfulnesse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forthy he thrild thee with a leaden dart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To love faire Daphne, which thee loved lesse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lesse she thee lov'd then was thy just desart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet was thy love her death, and her death was thy smart.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So lovedst thou the lusty Hyacinct;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So lovedst thou the faire Coronis deare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet both are of thy haplesse hand extinct,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet both in flowres doe live, and love thee beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The one a Paunce, the other a sweet-breare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For griefe whereof, ye mote have lively scene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The God himselfe rending his golden heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And breaking quite his garlond ever greene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With other signes of sorrow and impatient teene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Both for those two, and for his owne deare sonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sonne of Climene, he did repent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, bold to guide the charet of the Sunne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himselfe in thousand peeces fondly rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the world with flashing fire brent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So like, that all the walles did seeme to flame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet cruell Cupid, not herewith content,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forst him eftsoones to follow other game,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And love a Shephards daughter for his dearest Dame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He loved Isse for his dearest Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for her sake her cattell fedd awhile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for her sake a cowheard vile became:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The servant of Admetus, cowheard vile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles that from heaven he suffered exile.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long were to tell each other lovely fitt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now, like a Lyon hunting after spoile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now, like a stag; now, like a faulcon flit:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All which in that faire arras was most lively writ.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Next unto him was Neptune pictured,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his divine resemblance wondrous lyke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His face was rugged, and his hoarie hed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dropped with brackish deaw; his threeforkt Pyke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He stearnly shooke, and therewith fierce did stryke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The raging billowes, that on every syde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They trembling stood, and made a long broad dyke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That his swift charet might have passage wyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which foure great Hippodames did draw in temewise tyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His seahorses did seeme to snort amayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from their nosethrilles blow the brynie streame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That made the sparckling waves to smoke agayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And flame with gold; but the white fomy creame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did shine with silver, and shoot forth his beame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The God himselfe did pensive seeme and sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hong adowne his head as he did dreame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For privy love his brest empierced had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne ought but deare Bisaltis ay could make him glad.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He loved eke Iphimedia deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Aeolus faire daughter, Arne hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For whom he turnd him selfe into a Steare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fedd on fodder to beguile her sight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Also to win Deucalions daughter bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He turnd him selfe into a Dolphin fayre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And like a winged horse he tooke his flight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To snaky-locke Medusa to repayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On whom he got faire Pegasus that flitteth in the ayre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Next Saturne was, (but who would ever weene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sullein Saturne ever weend to love?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet love is sullein, and Saturnlike scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he did for Erigone it prove)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to a Centaure did him selfe transmove.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So proov'd it eke that gratious God of wine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When for to compasse Philliras hard love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He turnd himselfe into a fruitfull vine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And into her faire bosome made his grapes decline.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Long were to tell the amorous assayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gentle pangues, with which he maked meeke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The mightie Mars, to learne his wanton playes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How oft for Venus, and how often eek</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For many other Nymphes, he sore did shreek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With womanish teares, and with unwarlike smarts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Privily moystening his horrid cheeke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There was he painted full of burning dartes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many wide woundes launched through his inner partes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne did he spare (so cruell was the Elfe)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His owne deare mother, (ah! why should he so?)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne did he spare sometime to pricke himselfe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he might taste the sweet consuming woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he had wrought to many others moe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, to declare the mournfull Tragedyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And spoiles wherewith he all the ground did strow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More eath to number with how many eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High heven beholdes sad lovers nightly theeveryes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Kings, Queenes, Lords, Ladies, knights, and Damsels gent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were heap'd together with the vulgar sort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mingled with the raskall rablement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without respect of person or of port,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To shew Dan Cupids powre and great effort:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And round about a border was entrayld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of broken bowes and arrowes shivered short;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And a long bloody river through them rayld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So lively and so like that living sence it fayld.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And at the upper end of that faire rowme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There was an Altar built of pretious stone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of passing valew and of great renowme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which there stood an Image all alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of massy gold, which with his owne light shone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And winges it had with sondry colours dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More sondry colours then the proud Pavone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beares in his boasted fan, or Iris bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When her discolourd bow she spreds through hevens hight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Blyndfold he was; and in his cruell fist</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A mortall bow and arrowes keene did hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which he shot at randon, when him list,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some headed with sad lead, some with pure gold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Ah man! beware how thou those dartes behold.)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A wounded Dragon under him did ly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose hideous tayle his lefte foot did enfold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with a shaft was shot through either eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That no man forth might draw, ne no man remedye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And underneath his feet was written thus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">
						<i>Unto the Victor of the Gods this bee:</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the people in that ample hous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did to that image bowe their humble knee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oft committed fowle Idolatree.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That wondrous sight faire Britomart amazd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne seeing could her wonder satisfie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But ever more and more upon it gazd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whiles the passing brightnes her fraile sences dazd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho, as she backward cast her busie eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To search each secrete of that goodly sted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over the dore thus written she did spye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><i>Bee bold</i>: she oft and oft it over-red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet could not find what sence it figured:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But what so were therein or writ or ment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She was no whit thereby discouraged</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From prosecuting of her first intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But forward with bold steps into the next roome went.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Much fayrer then the former was that roome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And richlier by many partes arayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For not with arras made in painefull loome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with pure gold it all was overlayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wrought with wilde Antickes, which their follies playd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the rich metall as they living were.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A thousand monstrous formes therein were made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as false love doth oft upon him weare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For love in thousand monstrous formes doth oft appeare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And all about the glistring walles were hong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With warlike spoiles and with victorious prayes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of mightie Conquerours and Captaines strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which were whilome captived in their dayes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To cruell love, and wrought their owne decayes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their swerds and speres were broke, and hauberques rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And their proud girlonds of tryumphant bayes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Troden in dust with fury insolent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To shew the victors might and mercilesse intent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The warlike Mayd, beholding earnestly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The goodly ordinaunce of this rich Place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did greatly wonder; ne could satisfy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her greedy eyes with gazing a long space:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But more she mervaild that no footings trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor wight appeard, but wastefull emptinesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And solemne silence over all that place:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Straunge thing it seem'd, that none was to possesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So rich purveyaunce, ne them keepe with carefulnesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, as she lookt about, she did behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How over that same dore was likewise writ,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><i>Be bolde, be bolde</i>, and every where, <i>Be bold</i>;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That much she muz'd, yet could not construe it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By any ridling skill, or commune wit.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last she spyde at that rowmes upper end</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another yron dore, on which was writ,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><i>Be not too bold</i>; whereto though she did bend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her earnest minde, yet wist not what it might intend.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus she there wayted untill eventyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet living creature none she saw appeare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now sad shadowes gan the world to hyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From mortall vew, and wrap in darkenes dreare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet nould she d'off her weary armes, for feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of secret daunger, ne let sleepe oppresse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her heavy eyes with natures burdein deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But drew her selfe aside in sickernesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her wel-pointed wepons did about her dresse.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-12" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The maske of Cupid, and th'enchaunted</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Chamber are displayd;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whence Britomart redeemes faire</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Amoret, through charmes decayd.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Tho, whenas chearelesse Night ycovered had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayre heaven with an universall clowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That every wight dismayd with darkenes sad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In silence and in sleepe themselves did shrowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She heard a shrilling Trompet sound alowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Signe of nigh battaill, or got victory:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nought therewith daunted was her courage prowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But rather stird to cruell enmity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Expecting ever when some foe she might descry.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that an hideous storme of winde arose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With dreadfull thunder and lightning atwixt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And an earthquake, as if it streight would lose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The worlds foundations from his centre fixt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A direfull stench of smoke and sulphure mixt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ensewd, whose noyaunce fild the fearefull sted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the fourth howre of night untill the sixt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet the bold Britonesse was nought ydred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though much emmov'd, but stedfast still persevered.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All suddeinly a stormy whirlwind blew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throughout the house, that clapped every dore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which that yron wicket open flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As it with mighty levers had bene tore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And forth yssewd, as on the readie flore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of some Theatre, a grave personage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in his hand a braunch of laurell bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With comely haveour and count'nance sage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yclad in costly garments fit for tragicke Stage.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Proceeding to the midst he stil did stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if in minde he somewhat had to say;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the vulgare beckning with his hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In signe of silence, as to heare a play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By lively actions he gan bewray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some argument of matter passioned:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which doen, he backe retyred soft away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, passing by, his name discovered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ease, on his robe in golden letters cyphered.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The noble Mayd still standing all this vewd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And merveild at his straunge intendiment.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that a joyous fellowship issewd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Minstrales making goodly meriment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With wanton Bardes, and Rymers impudent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which together song full chearefully</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A lay of loves delight with sweet concent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After whom marcht a jolly company,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In manner of a maske, enranged orderly.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The whiles a most delitious harmony</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In full straunge notes was sweetly heard to sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the rare sweetnesse of the melody</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The feeble sences wholy did confound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the frayle soule in deepe delight nigh drownd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, when it ceast, shrill trompets lowd did bray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That their report did far away rebound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, when they ceast, it gan againe to play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whiles the maskers marched forth in trim aray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The first was Fansy, like a lovely Boy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of rare aspect, and beautie without peare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Matchable ether to that ympe of Troy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom Jove did love and chose his cup to beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that same daintie lad, which was so deare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To great Alcides, that, when as he dyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He wailed womanlike with many a teare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every wood and every valley wyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He filld with Hylas name; the Nymphes eke Hylas cryde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His garment nether was of silke nor say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But paynted plumes in goodly order dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as the sunburnt Indians do aray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their tawney bodies in their proudest plight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As those same plumes so seemd he vaine and light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That by his gate might easily appeare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For still he far'd as dauncing in delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his hand a windy fan did beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in the ydle ayre he mov'd still here and theare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And him beside marcht amorous Desyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who seemd of ryper yeares then th'other Swayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was that other swayne this elders syre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gave him being, commune to them twayne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His garment was disguysed very vayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his embrodered Bonet sat awry:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Twixt both his hands few sparks he close did stray ne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which still he blew and kindled busily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That soone they life conceiv'd, and forth in flames did fly.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Next after him went Doubt, who was yclad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In a discolour'd cote of straunge disguyse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That at his backe a brode Capuccio had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sleeves dependaunt Albanese-wyse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He lookt askew with his mistrustfull eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And nycely trode, as thornes lay in his way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that the flore to shrinke he did avyse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on a broken reed he still did stay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His feeble steps, which shrunck when hard thereon he lay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With him went Daunger, cloth'd in ragged weed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made of Beares skin, that him more dreadfull made;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet his owne face was dreadfull, ne did need</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Straunge horrour to deforme his griesly shade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A net in th'one hand, and a rusty blade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In th'other was; this Mischiefe, that Mishap:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With th'one his foes he threatned to invade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With th'other he his friends ment to enwrap;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For whom he could not kill he practizd to entrap.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Next him was Feare, all arm'd from top to toe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet thought himselfe not safe enough thereby,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But feard each shadow moving too or froe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, his owne armes when glittering he did spy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or clashing heard, he fast away did fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As ashes pale of hew, and winged heeld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evermore on Daunger fixt his eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst whom he alwayes bent a brasen shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which his right hand unarmed fearefully did wield.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With him went Hope in rancke, a handsome Mayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of chearefull looke and lovely to behold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In silken samite she was light arayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her fayre lockes were woven up in gold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She alway smyld, and in her hand did hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An holy-water-sprinckle, dipt in deowe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which she sprinckled favours manifold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On whom she list, and did great liking sheowe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great liking unto many, but true love to feowe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And after them Dissemblaunce and Suspect</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Marcht in one rancke, yet an unequall paire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she was gentle and of milde aspect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Courteous to all and seeming debonaire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Goodly adorned and exceeding faire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was that all but paynted and pourloynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her bright browes were deckt with borrowed haire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her deeds were forged, and her words false coynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And alwaies in her hand two clewes of silke she twynd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But he was fowle, ill favoured, and grim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under his eiebrowes looking still askaunce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever, as Dissemblaunce laught on him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He lowrd on her with daungerous eyeglaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shewing his nature in his countenaunce:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His rolling eies did never rest in place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But walkte each where for feare of hid mischaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Holding a lattis still before his face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through which he stil did peep as forward he did pace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Next him went Griefe and Fury, matcht yfere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Griefe all in sable sorrowfully clad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Downe hanging his dull head with heavy chere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet inly being more then seeming sad:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A paire of Pincers in his hand he had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which he pinched people to the "hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from thenceforth a wretched life they ladd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In wilfull languor and consuming smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dying each day with inward wounds of dolours dart.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Fury was full ill appareiled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In rags, that naked nigh she did appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With ghastly looks and dreadfull drerihed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from her backe her garments she did teare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from her head ofte rente her snarled heare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In her right hand a firebrand shee did tosse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About her head, still roming here and there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As a dismayed Deare in chace embost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgetfull of his safety, hath his right way lost.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>After them went Displeasure and Pleasaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He looking lompish and full sullein sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hanging downe his heavy countenaunce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She chearfull, fresh, and full of joyaunce glad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if no sorrow she ne felt ne drad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That evill matched paire they seemd to bee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An angry Waspe th'one in a viall had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th'other in hers an hony-laden Bee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus marched these six couples forth in faire degree.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>After all these there marcht a most faire Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Led of two grysie Villeins, th'one Despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other cleped Cruelty by name:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She, dolefull Lady, like a dreary Spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cald by strong charmes out of eternall night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had Deathes owne ymage figurd in her face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of sad signes, fearfull to living sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet in that horror shewd a seemely grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with her feeble feete did move a comely pace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her brest all naked, as nett yvory</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without adorne of gold or silver bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith the Craftesman wonts it beautify,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her dew honour was despoyled quight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And a wide wound therein (O ruefull sight!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Entrenched deep with knyfe accursed keene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet freshly bleeding forth her fainting spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(The worke of cruell hand) was to be scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That dyde in sanguine red her skin all snowy cleene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At that wide orifice her trembling hart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was drawne forth, and in silver basin layd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quite through transfixed with a deadly dart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in her blood yet steeming fresh embayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And those two villeins, which her steps upstayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When her weake feete could scarcely her sustaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fading vitall powres gan to fade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her forward still with torture did constraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And evermore encreased her consuming paine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Next after her, the winged God him selfe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came riding on a Lion ravenous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Taught to obay the menage of that Elfe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That man and beast with powre imperious</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Subdeweth to his kingdome tyrannous.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His blindfold eies he bad awhile unbinde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That his proud spoile of that same dolorous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Dame he might behold in perfect kinde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which scene, he much rejoyced in his cruell minde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Of which ful prowd, him selfe up rearing hye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He looked round about with sterne disdayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did survay his goodly company;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, marshalling the evill-ordered trayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that the darts which his right hand did straine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full dreadfully he shooke, that all did quake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And clapt on hye his coulourd winges twaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all his many it affraide did make:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tho, blinding him againe, his way he forth did take.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Behinde him was Reproch, Repentaunce, Shame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Reproch the first, Shame next, Repent behinde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kepentaunce feeble, sorrowfull, and lame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Reproch despightfull, carelesse, and unkinde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shame most ill-favourd, bestiall, and blinde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shame lowrd, Repentaunce sighd, Reproch did scould;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Reproch sharpe stings, Repentaunce whips entwinde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shame burning brond-yrons in her hand did hold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All three to each unlike, yet all made in one mould.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And after them a rude confused rout</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of persons flockt, whose names is hard to read:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emongst them was Sterne Strife, and Anger stout;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unquiet Care, and fond Unthriftyhead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lewd Losse of Time, and Sorrow seeming dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Inconstant Chaunge, and false Disloyalty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Consuming Riotise, and guilty Dread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of heavenly vengeaunce; faint Infirmity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vile Poverty; and, lastly, Death with infamy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There were full many moe like maladies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose names and natures I note readen well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So many moe, as there be phantasies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In wavering wemens witt, that none can tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or paines in love, or punishments in hell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which disguized marcht in masking wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About the chamber by the Damozell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then returned, having marched thrise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the inner rowme from whence they first did rise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So soone as they were in, the dore streightway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fast locked, driven with that stormy blast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which first it opened, and bore all away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then the brave Maid, which al this while was plast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In secret shade, and saw both first and last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Issewed forth, and went unto the dore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To enter in, but fownd it locked fast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It vaine she thought with rigorous uprore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For to efforce, when charmes had closed it afore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Where force might not availe, there sleights and art</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She cast to use, both fitt for hard emprize:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forthy from that same rowme not to depart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till morrow next shee did her selfe avize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When that same. Maske againe should forth arize.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The morrowe next appeard with joyous cheare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Calling men to their daily exercize:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then she, as morrow fresh, her selfe did reare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of her secret stand that day for to outweare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All that day she outwore in wandering</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gazing on that Chambers ornament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that againe the second evening</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her covered with her sable vestiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith the worlds faire beautie she hath blent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, when the second watch was almost past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That brasen dore flew open, and in went</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bold Britomart, as she had late forecast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nether of ydle showes, nor of false charmes aghast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So soone as she was entred, rownd about</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee cast her eies to see what was become</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all those persons which she saw without:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But lo! they streight were vanisht all and some;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne living wight she saw in all that roome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save that same woefull Lady, both whose hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were bounden fast, that did her ill become,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her small waste girt rownd with yron bands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon a brasen pillour, by the which she stands.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And her before the vile Enchaunter sate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Figuring straunge characters of his art:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With living blood he those characters wrate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dreadfully dropping from her dying hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeming transfixed with a cruell dart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all perforce to make her him to love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah! who can love the worker of her smart?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A thousand charmes he formerly did prove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet thousand charmes could not her stedfast hart remove.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as that virgin knight he saw in place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His wicked bookes in hast he overthrew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not caring his long labours to deface;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, fiercely running to that Lady trew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A murdrous knife out of his pocket drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which he thought, for villeinous despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In her tormented bodie to embrew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the stout Damzell, to him leaping light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His cursed hand withheld, and maistered his might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>From her, to whom his fury first he ment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wicked weapon rashly he did wrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, turning to herselfe, his fell intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unwares it strooke into her snowie chest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That litle drops empurpled her faire brest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Exceeding wroth therewith the virgin grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Albe the wound were nothing deepe imprest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fiercely forth her mortall blade she drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To give him the reward for such vile outrage dew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So mightily she smote him, that to ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He fell halfe dead: next stroke him should have slaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had not the Lady, which by him stood bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dernly unto her called to abstaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From doing him to dy: For else her paine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should be remedilesse; sith none but hee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which wrought it could the same recure againe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith she stayd her hand, loth stayd to bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For life she him envyde, and long'd revenge to see:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And to him said: "Thou wicked man, whose meed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For so huge mischiefe and vile villany</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is death, or if that ought doe death exceed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be sure that nought may save thee from to dy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if that thou this Dame do presently</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Restore unto her health and former state:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This doe, and live, els dye undoubtedly."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He, glad of life, that lookt for death but late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did yield him selfe right willing to prolong his date:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, rising up, gan streight to over-looke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those cursed leaves, his charmes back to reverse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full dreadfull thinges out of that balefull booke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He red, and measur'd many a sad verse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That horrour gan the virgins hart to perse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her faire locks up stared stiffe on end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hearing him those same bloody lynes reherse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, all the while he red, she did extend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her sword high over him, if ought he did offend.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Anon she gan perceive the house to quake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the dores to rattle round about:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet all that did not her dismaied make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor slack her threatfull hand for daungers dout:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But still with stedfast eye and courage stout</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abode, to weet what end would come of all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last that mightie chaine, which round about</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her tender waste was wound, adowne gan fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that great brasen pillour broke in peeces small.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The cruell steele, which thrild her dying hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fell softly forth, as of his owne accord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the wyde wound, which lately did dispart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her bleeding brest, and riven bowels gor'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was closed up, as it had not beene bor'd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every part to safety full sownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As she were never hurt, was soone restord.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, when she felt her selfe to be unbownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And perfect hole, prostrate she fell unto the grownd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Before faire Britomart she fell prostrate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saying; "Ah noble knight! what worthy meede</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can wretched Lady, quitt from wofull state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yield you in lieu of this your gracious deed?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your vertue selfe her owne reward shall breed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even immortal prayse and glory wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which I your vassall, by your prowesse freed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall through the world make to be notifyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And goodly well advaunce that goodly well was tryde."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Britomart, uprearing her from grownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said: "Gentle Dame, reward enough I weene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For many labours more then I have found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This, that in safetie now I have you scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And meane of your deliverance have beene.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Henceforth, faire Lady, comfort to you take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And put away remembrance of late teene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Insted thereof, know that your loving Make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath no lesse griefe endured for your gentle sake."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She much was chear'd to heare him mentiond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom of all living wightes she loved best.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then laid the noble Championesse strong hond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon th'enchaunter which had her distrest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So sore, and with foule outrages opprest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that great chaine, wherewith not long ygoe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He bound that pitteous Lady prisoner, now relest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himselfe she bound, more worthy to be so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And captive with her led to wretchednesse and wo.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Returning back, those goodly rowmes, which erst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She saw so rich and royally arayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now vanisht utterly and cleane subverst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She found, and all their glory quite decayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sight of such a chaunge her much dismayd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence forth descending to that perlous porch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those dreadfull flames she also found delayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And quenched quite like a consumed torch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That erst all entrers wont so cruelly to scorch.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>More easie issew now then entrance late</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She found; for now that fained dreadfull flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which chokt the porch of that enchaunted gate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And passage bard to all that thither came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was vanisht quite, as it were not the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gave her leave at pleasure forth to passe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th' Enchaunter selfe, which all that fraud did frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To have effbrst the love of that faire lasse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seeing his worke now wasted, deepe engrieved was.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when the Victoresse arrived there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where late she left the pensife Scudamore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With her own trusty Squire, both full of feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Neither of them she found where she them lore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereat her noble hart was stonisht sore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But most faire Amoret, whose gentle spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now gan to feede on hope, which she before</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Conceived had, to see her own deare knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Being thereof beguyld, was fild with new affright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But he, sad man, when he had long in drede</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Awayted there for Britomarts returne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet saw her not, nor signe of her good speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His expectation to despaire did turne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Misdeeming sure that her those flames did burne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therefore gan advize with her old Squire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who her deare nourslings losse no lesse did mourne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence to depart for further aide t'enquire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where let them wend at will, whilest here I doe respire.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="book-4" epub:type="part z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Containing the Legend of Cambel and Triamond, or of Friendship</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="book-4-prologue" epub:type="prologue">
				<p>
					<span>The rugged forhead, that with grave foresight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Welds kingdomes causes and affaires of state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My looser rimes (I wote) doth sharply wite</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For praising love as I have done of late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And magnifying lovers deare debate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which fraile youth is oft to follie led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through false allurement of that pleasing baite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That better were in vertues discipled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then with vaine poemes weeds to have their fancies fed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such ones ill judge of love that cannot love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne in their frosen hearts feele kindly flame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forthy they ought not thing unknowne reprove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne naturall affection faultlesse blame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For fault of few that have abusd the same;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For it of honor and all vertue is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The roote, and brings forth glorious flowres of fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That crowne true lovers with immortall blis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The meed of them that love, and do not live amisse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which who so list looke backe to former ages,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And call to count the things that then were donne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall find that all the workes of those wise sages,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And brave exploits which great Heroes wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In love were either ended or begunne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Witnesse the father of Philosophic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to his Critias, shaded oft from sunne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of love full manie lessons did apply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which these Stoicke censours cannot well deny.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To such therefore I do not sing at all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to that sacred Saint my soveraigne Queene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In whose chast brest all bountie naturall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And treasures of true love enlocked beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bove all her sexe that ever yet was scene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To her I sing of love, that loveth best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And best is lov'd of all alive, I weene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To her this song most fitly is addrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Queene of love, and Prince of peace from heaven blest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which that she may the better deigne to heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do thou, dred infant, Venus dearling dove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From her high spirit chase imperious feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And use of awfull Majestic remove:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Insted thereof with drops of melting love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deawd with ambrosiall kisses, by thee gotten</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From thy sweete smyling mother from above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sprinckle her heart, and haughtie courage soften,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she may hearke to love, and reade this lesson often.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Fayre Britomart saves Amoret:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Duessa discord breedes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Twixt Scudamour and Blandamour:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Their fight and warlike deedes.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Of lovers sad calamities of old</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full many piteous stories doe remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But none more piteous ever was ytold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then that of Amorets hart-binding chaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And this of Florimels unworthie paine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The deare compassion of whose bitter fit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My softened heart so sorely doth constraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I with teares full oft doe pittie it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And oftentimes doe wish it never had bene writ.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For from the time that Scudamour her bought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In perilous fight she never joyed day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A perilous fight, when he with force her brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From twentie Knights that did him all assay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet fairely well he did them all dismay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with great glorie both the shield of love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the Ladie selfe he brought away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom having wedded, as did him behove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A new unknowen mischiefe did from him remove.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For that same vile Enchauntour Busyran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The very selfe same day that she was wedded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amidst the bridale feast, whilest every man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Surcharged with wine, were heedlesse and ill-hedded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All bent to mirth before the bride was bedded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Brought in that mask of love which late was showen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there the Ladie, ill of friends bestedded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By way of sport, as oft in maskes is knowen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conveyed quite away to living wight unknowen.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Seven moneths he so her kept in bitter smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because his sinfull lust she would not serve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill such time as noble Britomart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Released her, that else was like to sterve</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through cruell knife that her deare heart did kerve:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now she is with her upon the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Marching in lovely wise, that could deserve</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No spot of blame, though spite did oft assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To blot her with dishonor of so faire a pray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet should it be a pleasant tale, to tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The diverse usage, and demeanure daint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That each to other made, as oft befell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Amoret right fearefull was and faint</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lest she wtih blame her honor should attaint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That everie word did tremble as she spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And everie looke was coy and wondrous quaint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And everie limbe that touched her did quake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet could she not but curteous countenance to her make.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For well she wist, as true it was indeed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her lives Lord and patrone of her health</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right well deserved, as his duefull meed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her love, her service, and her utmost wealth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All is his justly that all freely dealth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nathlesse her honor, dearer then her life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She sought to save, as thing reserv'd from stealth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Die had she lever with Enchanters knife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then to be false in love, profest a virgine wife.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereto her feare was made so much the greater</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through fine abusion of that Briton mayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, for to hide her fained sex the better</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And maske her wounded mind, both did and sayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full many things so doubtfull to be wayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That well she wist not what by them to gesse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For other-whiles to her she purpos made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of love, and other-whiles of lustfulnesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That much she feard his mind would grow to some excesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His will she feard; for him she surely thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be a man, such as indeed he seemed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And much the more by that he lately wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When her from deadly thraldome he redeemed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which no service she too much esteemed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet dread of shame and doubt of fowle dishonor</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made her not yeeld so much as due she deemed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet Britomart attended duly on her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As well became a knight, and did to her all honor.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It so befell one evening, that they came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto a Castell, lodged there to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where many a knight, and many a lovely Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was then assembled deeds of armes to see:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst all which was none more faire then shee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That many of them mov'd to eye her sore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The custome of that place was such, that hee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which had no love nor lemman there in store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should either winne him one, or lye without the dore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Amongst the rest there was a jolly knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, being asked for his love, avow'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That fairest Amoret was his by right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And offred that to justifie alowd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The warlike virgine, seeing his so prowd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And boastfull chalenge, wexed inlie wroth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But for the present did her anger shrowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sayd, her love to lose she was full loth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But either he should neither of them have, or both.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So foorth they went, and both together giusted;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that same younker soone was overthrowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made repent that he had rashly lusted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thing unlawfull, that was not his owne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet since he seemed valiant, though unknowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She, that no lesse was courteous then stout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cast how to salve, that both the custome showne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were kept, and yet that Knight not locked out;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That seem'd full hard t'accord two things so far in dout.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Seneschall was cal'd to deeme the right:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom she requir'd, that first fayre Amoret</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might be to her allow'd, as to a Knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That did her win and free from chalenge set:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which straight to her was yeelded without let.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, since that strange Knights love from him was quitted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She claim'd that to her selfe, as Ladies det,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He as a Knight might justly be admitted;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So none should be out shut, sith all of loves were fitted.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that, her glistring helmet she unlaced;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which doft, her golden lockes, that were upbound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still in a knot, unto her heeles downe traced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And like a silken veile in compasse round</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About her backe and all her bodie wound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as the shining skie in summers night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What time the dayes with scorching heat abound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is creasted all with lines of firie light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it prodigious seemes in common peoples sight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such when those Knights and Ladies all about</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beheld her, all were with amazement smit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every one gan grow in secret dout</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of this and that, according to each wit:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some thought that some enchantment faygned it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some, that Bellona in that warlike wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To them appear'd, with shield and armour fit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some, that it was a maske of strange disguise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So diversely each one did sundrie doubts devise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But that young Knight, which through her gentle deed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was to that goodly fellowship restor'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ten thousand thankes did yeeld her for her meed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, doubly overcommen, her ador'd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So did they all their former strife accord;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke fayre Amoret, now freed from feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More franke affection did to her afford,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to her bed, which she was wont forbeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now freely drew, and found right safe assurance theare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Where all that night they of their loves did treat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hard adventures, twixt themselves alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That each the other gan with passion great</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And griefull pittie privately bemone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The morow next, so soone as Titan shone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They both uprose and to their waies them dight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long wandred they, yet never met with none</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to their willes could them direct aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or to them tydings tell that mote their harts delight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lo! thus they rode, till at the last they spide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two armed Knights that toward them did pace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ech of them had ryding by his side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Ladie, seeming in so farre a space:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Ladies none they were, albee in face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And outward shew faire semblance they did beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For under maske of beautie and good grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vile treason and fowle falshood hidden were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That mote to none but to the warie wise appeare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The one of them the false Duessa night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That now had chang'd her former wonted hew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she could d'on so manie shapes in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As ever could Cameleon colours new;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So could she forge all colours, save the trew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other no whit better was then shee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that such as she was she plaine did shew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet otherwise much worse, if worse might bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dayly more offensive unto each degree.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her name was Ate, mother of debate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all dissention which doth dayly grow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst fraile men, that many a publike state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many a private oft doth overthrow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her false Duessa, who full well did know</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be most fit to trouble noble knights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which hunt for honor, raised from below</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the dwellings of the damned sprights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where she in darknes wastes her cursed daies and nights.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hard by the gates of hell her dwelling is;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There, whereas all the plagues and harmes abound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which punish wicked men that walke amisse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It is a darksome delve farre under ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With thornes and barren brakes environd round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none the same may easily out-win:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet many waies to enter may be found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But none to issue forth when one is in;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For discord harder is to end then to begin.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And all within, the riven walls were hung</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With ragged monuments of times forepast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which the sad effects of discord sung:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There were rent robes and broken scepters plast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Altars defyld, and holy things defast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disshivered speares, and shields ytorne in twaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great cities ransackt, and strong castles rast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nations captived, and huge armies slaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all which ruines there some relicks did remaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There was the signe of antique Babylon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of fatall Thebes; of Rome that raigned long;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of sacred Salem; and sad Ilion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For memorie of which on high there hong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The golden Apple, cause of all their wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which the three faire Goddesses did strive:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There also was the name of Nimrod strong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Alexander, and his Princes five</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which shar'd to them the spoiles that he had got alive.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And there the relicks of the drunken fray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which amongst the Lapithees befell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of the bloodie feast, which sent away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So many Centaures drunken soules to hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That under great Alcides furie fell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of the dreadfull discord, which did drive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The noble Argonauts to outrage fell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That each of life sought others to deprive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All mindlesse of the Golden fleece, which made them strive.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And eke of private persons many moe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That were too long a worke to count them all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some, of sworne friends that did their faith forgoe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some, of borne brethren prov'd unnaturall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some, of deare lovers foes perpetuall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Witnesse their broken bandes there to be scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their girlonds rent, their bowres despoyled all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The moniments whereof there byding beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As plaine as at the first when they were fresh and greene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such was her house within; but all without,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The barren ground was full of wicked weedes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which she her selfe had sowen all about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now growen great, at first of little seedes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The seedes of evill wordes and factious deedes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, when to ripenesse due they growen arre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bring foorth an infinite increase, that breedes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tumultuous trouble, and contentious Jarre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which most often end in bloudshed and in warre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And those same cursed seedes doe also serve</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To her for bread, and yeeld her living food:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For life it is to her, when others sterve</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through mischievous debate and deadly feood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she may sucke their life, and drinke their blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which she from her childhood had bene fed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she at first was borne of hellish brood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by infernall furies nourished;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That by her monstrous shape might easily be red.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her face most fowle and filthy was to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With squinted eyes contrarie wayes intended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And loathly mouth, unmeete a mouth to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nought but gall and venim comprehended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wicked wordes that God and man offended.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her lying tongue was in two parts divided,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both the parts did speake, and both contended;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as her tongue so was her hart discided,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That never thoght one thing, but doubly stil was guided.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Als as she double spake, so heard she double,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With matchlesse eares deformed and distort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fild with false rumors and seditious trouble,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bred in assemblies of the vulgar sort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That still are led with every light report:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as her eares, so eke her feet were odde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And much unlike; th'one long, the other short,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both misplast; that, when th'one forward yode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The other backe retired and contrarie trode.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Likewise unequall were her handes twaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That one did reach the other pusht away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That one did make the other mard againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sought to bring all things unto decay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereby great riches, gathered manie a day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She in short space did often bring to nought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And their possessours often did dismay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all her studie was and all her thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How she might overthrow the things that Concord wrought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So much her malice did her might surpas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That even th'Almightie selfe she did maligne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because to man so mercifull he was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto all his creatures so benigne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith she her selfe was of his grace indigne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all this worlds faire workmanship she tride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto his last confusion to bring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that great golden chaine quite to divide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With which it blessed Concord hath together tide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such was that hag which with Duessa roade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, serving her in her malitious use</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hurt good knights, was, as it were, her baude</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sell her borrowed beautie to abuse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For though, like withered tree that wanteth juyce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She old and crooked were, yet now of late</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As fresh and fragrant as the floure-deluce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She was become, by chaunge of her estate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made full goodly joyance to her new-found mate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her mate, he was a jollie youthfull knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That bore great sway in armes and chivalrie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And was indeed a man of mickle might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His name was Blandamour, that did descrie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His fickle mind full of inconstancie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now himselfe he fitted had right well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With two companions of like qualitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faithlesse Duessa, and false Paridell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That whether were more false full hard it is to tell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now when this gallant with his goodly crew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From farre espide the famous Britomart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like knight adventurous in outward vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his faire paragon, his conquests part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Approching nigh, eftsoones his wanton hart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was tickled with delight, and jesting sayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Lo! there, Sir Paridel, for your desart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Good lucke presents you with yond lovely mayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For pitie that ye want a fellow for your ayd."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By that the lovely paire drew nigh to hond:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when as Paridel more plaine beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Albee in heart he like affection fond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet mindfull how he late by one was feld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That did those armes and that same scutchion weld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He had small lust to buy his love so deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But answered; "Sir, him wise I never held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, having once escaped perill neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would afterwards afresh the sleeping evill reare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"This knight too late his manhood and his might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I did assay, that me right dearely cost;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne list I for revenge provoke new fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne for light Ladies love that soone is lost."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hot-spurre youth so scorning to be crost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Take then to you this Dame of mine," (quoth hee)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"And I, without your perill or your cost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will chalenge yond same other for my fee."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So forth he fiercely prickt that one him scarce could see.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The warlike Britonesse her soone addrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with such uncouth welcome did receave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her fayned Paramour, her forced guest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That being forst his saddle soone to leave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him selfe he did of his new love deceave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made him selfe thensample of his follie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which done, she passed forth, not taking leave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And left him now as sad, as whilome jollie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well warned to beware with whom he dar'd to dallie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when his other companie beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They to his succour ran with readie ayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, finding him unable once to weld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They reared him on horsebacke and upstayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till on his way they had him forth convayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the way, with wondrous griefe of mynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shame, he shewd him selfe to be dismayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More for the love which he had left behynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then that which he had to Sir Paridel resynd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nathlesse he forth did march, well as he might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made good semblance to his companie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dissembling his disease and evill plight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that ere long they chaunced to espie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two other knights, that towards them did ply</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With speedie course, as bent to charge them new</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when as Blandamour approching nie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perceiv'd to be such as they seemd in vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was full wo, and gan his former griefe renew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For th'one of them he perfectly descride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be Sir Scudamour, by that he bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The God of love with wings displayed wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom mortally he hated evermore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both for his worth, that all men did adore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke because his love he wonne by right:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when he thought, it grieved him full sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, through the bruses of his former fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He now unable was to wreake his old despight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Forthy he thus to Paridel bespake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Faire Sir, of friendship let me now you pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That as I late adventured for your sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hurts whereof me now from battell stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye will me now with like good turne repay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And justifie my cause on yonder knight."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ah! Sir," (said Paridell) "do not dismay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your selfe for this; my selfe will for you fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As ye have done for me: the left hand rubs the right."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that he put his spurres unto his steed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With speare in rest, and toward him did fare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like shaft out of a bow preventing speed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Scudamour was shortly well aware</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his approch, and gan him selfe prepare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him to receive with entertainment meete.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So furiously they met, that either bare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other downe under their horses feete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That what of them became themselves did scarsly weete,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when two billowes in the Irish sowndes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forcibly driven with contrarie tydes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do meete together, each abacke rebowndes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With roaring rage; and dashing on all sides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That filleth all the sea with fome, divydes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The doubtfull current into divers wayes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So fell those two in spight of both their prydes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Scudamour himselfe did soone uprayse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, mounting light, his foe for lying long upbrayes:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who, rolled on an heape, lay still in swound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All carelesse of his taunt and bitter rayle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that the rest him seeing lie on ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ran hastily, to weete what did him ayle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where rinding that the breath gan him to fayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With busie care they strove him to awake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doft his helmet, and undid his mayle:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So much they did, that at the last they brake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His slomber, yet so mazed that he nothing spake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when as Blandamour beheld, he sayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"False faitour Scudamour, that hast by slight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And foule advantage this good Knight dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Knight much better then thy selfe behight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well falles it thee that I am not in plight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This day to wreake the dammage by thee donne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such is thy wont, that still when any Knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is weakned, then thou doest him overronne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So hast thou to thy selfe false honour often wonne."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He little answer'd, but in manly heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mightie indignation did forbeare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which was not yet so secret, but some part</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereof did in his frouning face appeare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as a gloomie cloud, the which doth beare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An hideous storme, is by the Northerne blast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quite overblowne, yet doth not passe so cleare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that it all the skie doth overcast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With darknes dred, and threatens all the world to wast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ah gentle knight!" then false Duessa sayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Why do ye strive for Ladies love so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose chiefe desire is love and friendly aid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst gentle Knights to nourish evermore?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne be ye wroth, Sir Scudamour, therefore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she, your love, list love another knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne do your selfe dislike a whit the more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Love is free, and led with selfe delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne will enforced be with maisterdome or might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So false Duessa; but vile Ate thus:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Both foolish knights! I can but laugh at both,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That strive and storme with stirre outrageous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For her, that each of you alike doth loth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And loves another, with whom now she goth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In lovely wise, and sleepes, and sports, and playes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilest both you here with many a cursed oth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sweare she is yours, and stirre up bloudie frayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To win a willow bough, whilest other weares the baycs.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Vile hag!" (sayd Scudamour) "why dost thou lye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And falsly seekst a vertuous wight to shame?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Fond knight," (sayd she) "the thing that with this eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I saw, why should I doubt to tell the same?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Then tell," (quoth Blandamour) "and feare no blame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tell what thou saw'st, maulgre who so it heares."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"I saw" (quoth she) "a stranger knight, whose name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I wote not well, but in his shield he beares</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(That well I wote) the heads of many broken speares;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"I saw him have your Amoret at will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I saw him kisse; I saw him her embrace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I saw him sleepe with her all night his fill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All manie nights; and manie by in place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That present were to testifie the case."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when as Scudamour did heare, his heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was thrild with inward griefe: as when in chace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Parthian strikes a stag with shivering dart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The beast astonisht stands in middest of his smart.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So stood Sir Scudamour when this he heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne word had he to speake for great dismay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But lookt on Glauce grim; who woxe afeard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of outrage for the words which she heard say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Albee untrue she wist them by assay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Blandamour, whenas he did espie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His chaunge of cheere that anguish did bewray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He woxe full blithe, as he had got thereby,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gan thereat to triumph without victorie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Lo! recreant," (sayd he) "the fruitlesse end</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of thy vaine boast, and spoile of love misgotten,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereby the name of knight-hood thou dost shend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all true lovers with dishonor blotten:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All things not rooted well will soone be rotten."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Fy, fy! false knight," (then false Duessa cryde)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Unworthy life, that love with guile hast gotten;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be thou, where ever thou do go or ryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loathed of ladies all, and of all knights defyde!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Scudamour, for passing great despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Staid not to answer; scarcely did refraine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that in all those knights and ladies sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He for revenge had guiltlesse Glauce slaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, being past, he thus began amaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"False traitour squire! false squire of falsest knight!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why doth mine hand from thine avenge abstaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose Lord hath done my love this foule despight?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why do I not it wreake on thee, now in my might?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Discourteous, disloyall Britomart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untrue to God, and unto man unjust!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What vengeance due can equall thy desart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hast with shamefull spot of sinfull lust</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Defil'd the pledge committed to thy trust?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let ugly shame and endlesse infamy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Colour thy name with foule reproaches rust!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet thou, false Squire, his fault shalt deare aby,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with thy punishment his penance shalt supply."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The aged Dame, him seeing so enraged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was dead with feare; nathlesse, as neede required,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His flaming furie sought to have assuaged</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sober words, that sufferance desired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till time the tryall of her truth expyred;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evermore sought Britomart to cleare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he the more with furious rage was fyred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thrise his hand to kill her did upreare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thrise he drew it backe; so did at last forbeare.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Blandamour winnes false Florimell;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Paridell for her strives;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They are accorded: Agape</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Doth lengthen her Sonnes lives.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Firebrand of hell, first tynd in Phlegeton</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By thousand furies, and from thence out throwen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into this world to worke confusion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And set it all on fire by force unknowen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is wicked discord; whose small sparkes once blowen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">None but a God or godlike man can slake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as was Orpheus, that, when strife was growen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst those famous ympes of Greece, did take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His silver Harpe in hand and shortly friends them make:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Or such as that celestiall Psalmist was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, when the wicked feend his Lord tormented,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With heavenly notes, that did all other pas</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The outrage of his furious fit relented.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such Musicke is wise words, with time concented,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To moderate stiffe mindes disposd to strive:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as that prudent Romane well invented,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What time his people into partes did rive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Them reconcyld againe, and to their homes did drive.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such us'd wise Glauce to that wrathfull knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To calme the tempest of his troubled thought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet Blandamour with termes of foule despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Paridell her scornd, and set at nought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As old and crooked and not good for ought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both they unwise, and warelesse of the evill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That by themselves unto themselves is wrought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through that false witch, and that foule aged drevill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The one a feend, the other an incarnate devill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With whom as they thus rode accompanide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They were encountred of a lustie Knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That had a goodly Ladie by his side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom he made great dalliance and delight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It was to weete the bold Sir Ferraugh hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He that from Braggadocchio whilome reft</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The snowy Florimell, whose beautie bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made him seeme happie for so glorious theft;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet was it in due triall but a wandring weft.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when as Blandamour, whose fancie light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was alwaies flitting as the wavering wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After each beautie that appeard in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beheld, eftsoones it prickt his wanton mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sting of lust that reasons eye did blind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to Sir Paridell these words he sent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Sir knight, why ride ye dumpish thus behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since so good fortune doth to you present</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So fayre a spoyle, to make you joyous meriment?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Paridell, that had too late a tryall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the bad issue of his counsell vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">List not to hearke, but made this faire denyall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Last turne was mine, well proved to my paine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This now be yours; God send you better gaine!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose scoffed words he taking halfe in scorne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fiercely forth prickt his steed as in disdaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against that Knight, ere he him well could torne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By meanes whereof he hath him lightly overborne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who, with the sudden stroke astonisht sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the ground awhile in slomber lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles his love away the other bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, shewing her, did Paridell upbray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Lo! sluggish Knight, the victors happie pray!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So fortune friends the bold:" whom Paridell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeing so faire indeede, as he did say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His hart with secret envie gan to swell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And inly grudge at him that he had sped so well.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nathlesse proud man himselfe the other deemed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having so peerelesse paragon ygot:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For sure the fayrest Florimell him seemed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To him was fallen for his happie lot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose like alive on earth he weened not:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore he her did court, did serve, did wooe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With humblest suit that he imagine mot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all things did devise, and all things dooe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That might her love prepare, and liking win theretoo.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She, in regard thereof, him recompenst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With golden words and goodly countenance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And such fond favours sparingly dispenst:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes him blessing with a light eye-glance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And coy lookes tempring with loose dalliance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes estranging him in sterner wise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That having cast him in a foolish trance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He seemed brought to bed in Paradise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And prov'd himselfe most foole in what he seem'd most wise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So great a mistresse of her art she was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And perfectly practiz'd in womans craft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That though therein himselfe he thought to pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by his false allurements wylie draft</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had thousand women of their love beraft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet now he was surpriz'd: for that false spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which that same witch had in this forme engraft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was so expert in every subtile slight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it could overreach the wisest earthly wight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet he to her did dayly service more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dayly more deceived was thereby;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet Paridell him envied therefore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As seeming plast in sole felicity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So blind is lust false colours to descry.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Ate soone discovering his desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rinding now fit opportunity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To stirre up strife twixt love and spight and ire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did privily put coles unto his secret fire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By sundry meanes thereto she prickt him forth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now with remembrance of those spightfull speaches,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">JNow with opinion or his owne more worth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now with recounting of like former breaches</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made in their friendship, as that Hag him teaches:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever when his passion is allayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She it revives, and new occasion reaches;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That on a time, as they together way'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He made him open chalenge, and thus boldly sayd;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Too boastfull Blandamoure! too long I beare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The open wrongs thou doest me day by day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well know'st thou, when we friendship first did sweare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The covenant was, that every spoyle or pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should equally be shard betwixt us tway.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where is my part then of this Ladie bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom to thy selfe thou takest quite away?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Render therefore therein to me my right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or answere for thy wrong as shall fall out in fight."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Exceeding wroth thereat was Blandamour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gan this bitter answere to him make:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Too foolish Paridell! that fayrest floure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wouldst gather faine, and yet no paines wouldst take:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But not so easie will I her forsake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This hand her wonne, this hand shall her defend."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that they gan their shivering speares to shake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And deadly points at cithers breast to bend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgetfull each to have bene ever others frend.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Their firie steedes with so untamed forse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did beare them both to fell avenges end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That both their speares with pitilesse remorse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through shield and mayle and haberjeon did wend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in their flesh a griesly passage rend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with the furie of their owne affret</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each other horse and man to ground did send;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where, lying still awhile, both did forget</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The perilous present stownd in which their lives were set.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when two warlike Brigandines at sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With murdrous weapons arm'd to cruell fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do meete together on the watry lea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They stemme ech other with so fell despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with the shocke of their owne heedlesse might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their wooden ribs are shaken nigh asonder.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They which from shore behold the dreadfull sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of flashing fire, and heare the ordenance thonder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do greatly stand amaz'd at such unwonted wonder.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At length they both upstarted in amaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As men awaked rashly out of dreme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And round about themselves awhile did gaze;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till seeing her, that Florimell did seme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In doubt to whom she viclorie should deeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith their dulled sprights they edgd anew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, drawing both their swords, with rage extreme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like two mad mastiffes, each on other flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shields did share, and mailes did rash, and helmes did hew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So furiously each other did assayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if their soules they would attonce have rent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of their brests, that streames of bloud did rayle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adowne, as if their springs of life were spent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the ground with purple bloud was sprent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all their armours staynd with bloudie gore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet scarcely once to breath would they relent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So mortall was their malice, and so sore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Become, of fayned friendship which they vow'd afore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And that which is for Ladies most besitting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To stint all strife and foster friendly peace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was from those Dames so farre and so unfitting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As that, instead of praying them surcease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They did much more their cruelty encrease;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bidding them fight for honour of their love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rather die then Ladies cause release:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which vaine termes so much they did them move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That both resolv'd the last extremities to prove.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There they, I weene, would fight untill this day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had not a Squire, even he the Squire of Dames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By great adventure travelled that way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who seeing both bent to so bloudy games,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both of old well knowing by their names,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drew nigh, to weete the cause of their debate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And first laide on those Ladies thousand blames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That did not seeke t' appease their deadly hate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But gazed on their harmes, not pittying their estate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And then those Knights he humbly did beseech</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To stay their hands, till he awhile had spoken;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who lookt a little up at that his speech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet would not let their battell so be broken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both greedie fiers on other to be wroken:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet he to them so earnestly did call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And them conjur'd by some well knowen token,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they at last their wrothfull hands let fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Content to heare him speake, and glad to rest withall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>First he desir'd their cause of strife to see:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They said, it was for love of Florimell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ah gentle Knights!" (quoth he) "how may that bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And she so farre astray, as none can tell?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Fond Squire," full angry then sayd Paridell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Seest not the Ladie there before thy face?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He looked backe, and, her avizing well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weend, as he said, by that her outward grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That fayrest Florimell was present there in place.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Glad man was he to see that joyous sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For none alive but joy'd in Florimell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lowly to her lowting thus behight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Fayrest of faire, that fairenesse doest excell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This happie day I have to greete you well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which you safe I see, whom thousand late</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Misdoubted lost through mischiefe that befell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long may you live in health and happie state!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She litle answer'd him, but lightly did aggrate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then, turning to those Knights, he gan anew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"And you, Sir Blandamour, and Paridell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">1 hat for this Ladie, present in your vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have rays'd this cruell warre and outrage fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Certes, me seemes, bene not advised well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But rather ought in friendship for her sake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To joyne your force, their forces to repell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seeke perforce her from you both to take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of your gotten spoyle their owne triumph to make."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereat Sir Blandamour, with countenance sterne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All full of wrath, thus fiercely him bespake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Aread, thou Squire, that I the man may learne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That dare fro me thinke Florimell to take!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Not one," (quoth he) "but many doe partake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Herein; as thus: It lately so befell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Satyran a girdle did uptake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well knowne to appertaine to Florimell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which for her sake he wore, as him beseemed well.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But, when as she her selfe was lost and gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full many knights, that loved her like deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereat did greatly grudge, that he alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That lost faire Ladies ornament should weare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gan therefore close spight to him to beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he to shun, and stop vile envies sting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath lately caus'd to be proclaim'd each where</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A solemne feast, with publike turneying,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To which all knights with them their Ladies are to bring:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And of them all she, that is fayrest found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall have that golden girdle for reward;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of those Knights, who is most stout on ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall to that fairest Ladie be prefard.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since therefore she her selfe is now your ward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To you that ornament of hers pertaines</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against all those that chalenge it to gard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And save her honour with your ventrous paines:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That shall you win more glory than ye here find gaines."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When they the reason of his words had hard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They gan abate the rancour of their rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with their honours and their loves regard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The furious flames of malice to asswage.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho each to other did his faith engage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like faithfull friends thenceforth to joyne in one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all their force, and battell strong to wage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst all those knights, as their professed fone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That chaleng'd ought in Florimell, save they alone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So, well accorded, forth they rode together</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In friendly sort that lasted but a while;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of all old dislikes they made faire weather;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet all was forg'd and spred with golden foyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That under it hidde hate and hollow guyle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne certes can that friendship long endure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">However gay and goodly be the style,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That doth ill cause or evill end enure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For vertue is the band that bindeth harts most sure.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus as they marched all in close disguise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of fayned love, they chaunst to overtake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two knights that lincked rode in lovely wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if they secret counsels did partake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And each not farre behinde him had his make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weete, two Ladies of most goodly hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That twixt themselves did gentle purpose make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unmindfull both of that discordfull crew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which with speedie pace did after them pursew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who, as they now approched nigh at hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deeming them doughtie, as they did appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They sent that Squire afore, to understand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What mote they be: who, viewing them more neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Returned readie newes, that those same weare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two of the prowest Knights in Faery lond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And those two Ladies their two lovers deare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Couragious Cambell, and stout Triamond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Canacee and Cambine linckt in lovely bond.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whylome, as antique stories tellen us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those two were foes the fellonest on ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And battell made the dreddest daungerous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ever shrilling trumpet did resound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though now their acts be no where to be found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As that renowmed Poet them compyled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With warlike numbers and Heroicke sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dan Chaucer, well of English undefyled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Fames eternall beadroll worthie to be fyled.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But wicked Time that all good thoughts doth waste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And workes of noblest wits to nought outweare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That famous moniment hath quite defaste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And robd the world of threasure endlesse deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which mote have enriched all us heare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O cursed Eld! the cankerworme of writs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How may these rimes, so rude as doth appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hope to endure, sith workes of heavenly wits</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are quite devourd, and brought to nought by little bits?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then pardon, O most sacred happie spirit!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I thy labours lost may thus revive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And steale from thee the meede of thy due merit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none durst ever whilest thou wast alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And being dead in vaine yet many strive:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne dare I like; but, through infusion sweete</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of thine owne spirit which doth in me survive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I follow here the footing of thy feete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That with thy meaning so I may the rather meete.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Cambelloes sister was fayre Canacee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was the learnedst Ladie in her dayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well scene in everie science that mote bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every secret worke of natures wayes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In wittie riddles, and in wise soothsayes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In power of herbes, and tunes of beasts and burds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, that augmented all her other prayse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She modest was in all her deedes and words,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wondrous chast of life, yet lov'd of Knights and Lords.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Full many Lords and many Knights her loved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet she to none of them her liking lent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever was with fond affection moved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But rul'd her thoughts with goodly governement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For dread of blame and honours blemishment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke unto her lookes a law she made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none of them once out of order went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But like to warie Centonels well stayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still watcht on every side, of secret foes affrayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So much the more as she refusd to love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So much the more she loved was and sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That oftentimes unquiet strife did move</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst her lovers, and great quarrels wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That oft for her in bloudie armes they fought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which whenas Cambell, that was stout and wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perceiv'd would breede great mischiefe, he bethought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How to prevent the perill that mote rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And turne both him and her to honour, in this wise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One day, when all that troupe of warlike wooers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Assembled were to weet whose she should bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All mightie men and dreadfull derring-dooers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(The harder it to make them well agree)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst them all this end he did decree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, of them all which love to her did make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They by consent should chose the stoutest three</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with himselfe should combat for her sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of them all the viclour should his sister take.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Bold was the chalenge, as himselfe was bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And courage full of haughtie hardiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Approved oft in perils manifold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he atchiev'd to his great ornament;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yet his sisters skill unto him lent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most confidence and hope of happie speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Conceived by a ring which she him sent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, mongst the manie vertues which we reed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had power to staunch al wounds that mortally did bleed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Well was that rings great vertue knowen to all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That dread thereof and his redoubted might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did all that youthly rout so much appall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none of them durst undertake the fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More wise they weend to make of love delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then life to hazard for faire Ladies looke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet uncertaine by such outward sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though for her sake they all that perill tooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether she would them love, or in her liking brooke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Amongst those knights there were three brethren bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Three bolder brethren never were yborne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Borne of one mother in one happie mold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Borne at one burden in one happie morne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrise happie mother, and thrise happie morne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That bore three such, three such not to be fond!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her name was Agape, whose children werne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All three as one; the first hight Priamond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The second Dyamond, the youngest Triamond.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Stout Priamond, but not so strong to strike;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strong Diamond, but not so stout a knight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Triamond was stout and strong alike:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On horsebacke used Triamond to fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Priamond on foote had more delight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But horse and foote knew Diamond to wield:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With curtaxe used Diamond to smite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Triamond to handle speare and shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But speare and curtaxe both usd Priamond in field.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>These three did love each other dearely well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with so firme affection were allyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if but one soule in them all did dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which did her powre into three parts divyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like three faire branches budding farre and wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from one roote deriv'd their vitall sap:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And like that roote that doth her life divide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their mother was; and had full blessed hap</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These three so noble babes to bring forth at one clap.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Their mother was a Fay, and had the skill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of secret things, and all the powres of nature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which she by art could use unto her will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to her service bind each living creature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through secret understanding of their feature.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereto she was right faire, whenso her face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She list discover, and of goodly stature:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she, as Fayes are wont, in privie place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did spend her dayes, and lov'd in forests wyld to space.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There on a day a noble youthly knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeking adventures in the salvage wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did by great fortune get of her the sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As she sate carelesse by a cristall flood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Combing her golden lockes, as seernd her good;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unawares upon her laying hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That strove in vaine him long to have withstood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oppressed her, and there (as it is told)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Got these three lovely babes, that prov'd three champions bold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which she with her long fostred in that wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that to ripenesse of mans state they grew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then shewing forth signes of their fathers blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They loved armes, and knighthood did ensew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeking adventures where they anie knew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when their mother saw, she gan to dout</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their safetie; least by searching daungers new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rash provoking perils all about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their days mote be abridged through their corage stout.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therefore desirous th'end of all their dayes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To know, and them t'enlarge with long extent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By wondrous skill and many hidden wayes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the three fatall sisters house she went.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Farre under ground from tracl: of living went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Downe in the bottome of the deepe Abysse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where Demogorgon, in dull darknesse pent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Farre from the view of gods and heavens bliss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hideous Chaos keepes, their dreadfull dwelling is.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There she them found all sitting round about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The direfull distaffe standing in the mid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with unwearied fingers drawing out</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The lines of life, from living knowledge hid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sad Clotho held the rocke, the whiles the thrid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By griesly Lachesis was spun with paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That cruell Atropos eftsoones undid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With cursed knife cutting the twist in twaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most wretched men, whose dayes depend on thrids so vaine!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She, them saluting, there by them sate still</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beholding how the thrids of life they span:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when at last she had beheld her fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Trembling in heart, and looking pale and wan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her cause of comming she to tell began.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom fierce Atropos: "Bold Fay, that durst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Come see the secret of the life of man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well worthie thou to be of Jove accurst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke thy childrens thrids to be asunder burst!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whereat she sore affrayd, yet her besought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To graunt her boone, and rigour to abate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she might see her childrens thrids forth brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And know the measure of their utmost date</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To them ordained by eternall fate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Clotho graunting shewed her the same.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That when she saw, it did her much amate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see their thrids so thin as spiders frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke so short, that seemd their ends out shortly came.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She then began them humbly to intreate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To draw them longer out, and better twine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That so their lives might be prolonged late:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Lachesis thereat gan to repine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sayd; "Fond dame, that deem'st of things divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As of humane, that they may altred bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chaung'd at pleasure for those impes of thine!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not so; for what the Fates do once decree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not all the gods can chaunge, nor Jove him self can free!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Then since" (quoth she) "the terme of each mans life</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For nought may lessened nor enlarged bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Graunt this; that when ye shred with fatall knife</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His line, which is the eldest of the three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which is of them the shortest, as I see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones his life may passe into the next:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, when the next shall likewise ended bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That both their lives may likewise be annext</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the third, that his may so be trebly wext.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They graunted it; and then that carefull Fay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Departed thence with full contented mynd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, comming home, in warlike fresh aray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them found all three according to their kynd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But unto them what destinie was assynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or how their lives were eekt, she did not tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But evermore, when she fit time could fynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She warned them to tend their safeties well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And love each other deare, what ever them befell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So did they surely during all their dayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And never discord did amongst them fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which much augmented all their other praise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now, t' increase affection naturall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In love of Canacee theyjoyned all:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon which ground this same great battell grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great matter growing of beginning small,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which, for length, I will not here pursew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But rather will reserve it for a Canto new.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-3" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The Battell twixt three Brethren with</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Cambell for Canacee:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cambina with true friendships bond</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Doth their long strife agree.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>O! why doe wretched men so much desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To draw their dayes unto the utmost date,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doe not rather wish them soone expire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Knowing the miserie of their estate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thousand perills which them still awate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tossing them like a boate amid the mayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That every houre they knocke at deathes gate?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he that happie seemes, and least in payne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet is as nigh his end as he that most doth playne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therefore this Fay I hold but fond and vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which, in seeking for her children three</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long life, thereby did more prolong their paine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet whilest they lived none did ever see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More happie creatures then they seem'd to bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor more ennobled for their courtesie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That made them dearely lov'd of each degree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne more renowmed for their chevalrie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That made them dreaded much of all men farre and nie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>These three that hardie chalenge tooke in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Canacee with Cambell for to fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The day was set, that all might understand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pledges pawnd the same to keepe aright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That day, the dreddest day that living wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did ever see upon this world to shine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So soone as heavens window shewed light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These warlike Champions, all in armour shine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Assembled were in field the chalenge to define.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The field with listes was all about enclos'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To barre the prease of people farre away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at th'one side sixe judges were dispos'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To view and deeme the deedes of armes that day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on the other side, in fresh aray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayre Canacee upon a stately stage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was set, to see the fortune of that fray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to be scene, as his most worthie wage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That could her purchase with his lives adventur'd gage.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then entred Cambell first into the list,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With stately steps and fearelesse countenance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if the conquest his he surely wist.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone after did the brethren three advance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In brave aray and goodly amenance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With scutchins gilt and banners broad displayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, marching thrise in warlike ordinance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrise lowted lowly to the noble Mayd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whiles shril trompets and loud clarions sweetly playd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which doen, the doughty chalenger came forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All arm'd to point, his chalenge to abet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst whom Sir Priamond, with equall worth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And equall armes, himselfe did forward set.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A trompet blew; they both together met</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With dreadfull force and furious intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Carelesse of perill in their fiers affret,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if that life to losse they had forelent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cared not to spare that should be shortly spent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Right prafticke was Sir Priamond in fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And throughly skild in use of shield and speare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne lesse approved was Cambelloes might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne lesse his skill in weapons did appeare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hard it was to weene which harder were.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full many mightie strokes on either side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were sent, that seemed death in them to beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But they were both so watchfull and well eyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they avoyded were, and vainely by did slyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet one, of many, was so strongly bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By Priamond, that with unluckie glaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through Cambels shoulder it unwarely went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That forced him his shield to disadvaunce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much was he grieved with that gracelesse chaunce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet from the wound no drop of bloud there fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wondrous paine, that did the more enhaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His haughtie courage to avengement fell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smart daunts not mighty harts, but makes them more to swell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that, his poynant speare he fierce aventred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With doubled force close underneath his shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That through the mayles into his thigh it entred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, there arresting, readie way did yield</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For bloud to gush forth on the grassie field;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he for paine himselfe n'ote right upreare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But too and fro in great amazement reel'd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like an old Oke, whose pith and sap is scare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At puffe of every storme doth stagger here and theare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom so dismayd when Cambell had espide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Againe he drove at him with double might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nought mote stay the steele, till in his side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The mortall point most cruelly empight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where fast infixed, whilest he sought by slight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It forth to wrest, the staffe asunder brake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And left the head behinde: with which despight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He all enrag'd his shivering speare did shake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And charging him afresh thus felly him bespake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Lo! faitour, there thy meede unto thee take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The meede of thy mischalenge and abet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not for thine owne, but for thy sisters sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have I thus long thy life unto thee let:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to forbeare doth not forgive the det."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wicked weapon heard his wrathfull vow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, passing forth with furious affiret,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pierst through his bever quite into his brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That with the force it backward forced him to bow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith asunder in the midst it brast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his hand nought but the troncheon left;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other halfe, behind yet sticking fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of his headpeece Cambell fiercely reft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with such furie backe at him it heft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That making way unto his dearest life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His weasand-pipe it through his gorget cleft.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence streames of purple bloud issuing rife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let forth his wearie ghost, and made an end of strife.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His wearie ghost assoyld from fleshly band</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did not, as others wont, directly fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto her rest in Plutoes griesly land;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne into ayre did vanish presently,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne chaunged was into a starre in sky;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But through traduclion was eftsoones derived,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as his mother prayd the Destinie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into his other brethren that survived,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In whom he liv'd anew, of former life deprived.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when on ground his brother next beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though sad and sorie for so heavy sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet leave unto his sorrow did not yeeld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But rather stir'd to vengeance and despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through secret feeling of his generous spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rusht fiercely forth the battell to renew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As in reversion of his brothers right;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chalenging the Virgin as his dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His foe was soone addrest: the trompets freshly blew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that they both together fiercely met,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if that each ment other to devoure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with their axes both so sorely bet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That neither plate nor mayle, where as their powre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They felt, could once sustaine the hideous stowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But rived were like rotten wood asunder;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilest through their rifts the ruddie bloud did showre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fire did flash, like lightning after thunder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That fild the lookers on attonce with ruth and wonder.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when two Tygers prickt with hungers rage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have by good fortune found some beasts fresh spoyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which they weene their famine to asswage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gaine a feastfull guerdon of their toyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both falling out doe stirre up strifefull broyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cruell battell twixt themselves doe make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles neither lets the other touch the soyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But either sdeignes with other to partake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So cruelly these Knights strove for that Ladies sake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Full many strokes, that mortally were ment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles were enterchaunged twixt them two;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet they were all with so good wariment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or warded, or avoyded and let goe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That still the life stood fearelesse of her foe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till Diamond, disdeigning long delay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of doubtfull fortune wavering to and fro,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Resolv'd to end it one or other way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And heav'd his murdrous axe at him with mighty sway.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The dreadfull stroke, in case it had arrived</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where it was ment, (so deadly it was ment)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The soule had sure out of his bodie rived,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stinted all the strife incontinent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Cambels fate that fortune did prevent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, seeing it at hand, he swarv'd asyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so gave way unto his fell intent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, missing of the marke which he had eyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was with the force nigh feld, whilst his right foot did slyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when a Vulture greedie of his pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through hunger long that hart to him doth lend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strikes at an Heron with all his bodies sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from his force seemes nought may it defend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The warie fowle, that spies him toward bend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His dreadfull souse, avoydes it, shunning light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And maketh him his wing in vaine to spend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with the weight of his owne weeldlesse might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He falleth nigh to ground, and scarse recovereth flight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which faire adventure when Cambello spide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full lightly, ere himselfe he could recower</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From daungers dread to ward his naked side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He can let drive at him with all his power,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his axe him smote in evill hower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from his shoulders quite his head he reft:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The headlesse tronke, as heedlesse of that stower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stood still awhile, and his fast footing kept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till, feeling life to fayle, it fell, and deadly slept.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They which that piteous spectacle beheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were much amaz'd the headlesse tronke to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stand up so long, and weapon vaine to weld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unweeting of the Fates divine decree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For lifes succession in those brethren three.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For notwithstanding that one soule was reft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet had the bodie not dismembred bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It would have lived, and revived eft;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, finding no fit seat, the lifelesse corse it left.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It left; but that same soule which therein dwelt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Streight entring into Triamond him fild</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With double life and griefe; which when he felt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one whose inner parts had bene ythrild</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With point of steele that close his hartbloud spild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He lightly lept out of his place of rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rushing forth into the emptie field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against Cambello fiercely him addrest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, him affronting soone, to fight was readie prest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Well mote ye wonder how that noble Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After he had so often wounded beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could stand on foot now to renew the fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But had ye then him forth advauncing scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some newborne wight ye would him surely weene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So fresh he seemed and so fierce in sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as a Snake, whom wearie winters teene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath worne to nought, now feeling sommers might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Casts off his ragged skin and freshly doth him dight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All was through vertue of the ring he wore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which not onely did not from him let</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One drop of bloud to fall, but did restore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His weakned powers, and dulled spirits whet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through working of the stone therein yset.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Else how could one of equall might with most,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against so many no lesse mightie met,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Once thinke to match three such on equall cost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three such as able were to match a puissant host?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet nought thereof was Triamond adredde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne desperate of glorious victorie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But sharpely him assayld, and sore bestedde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With heapes of strokes, which he at him let flie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As thicke as hayle forth poured from the skie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He stroke, he soust, he foynd, he hewd, he lasht,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did his yron brond so fast applie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from the same the fierie sparkles flasht,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As fast as water-sprinkles gainst a rocke are dasht.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Much was Cambello daunted with his blowes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So thicke they fell, and forcibly were sent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he was forst from daunger of the throwes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Backe to retire, and somewhat to relent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till th' heat of his fierce furie he had spent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when for want of breath gan to abate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He then afresh with new encouragement</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did him assayle, and mightily amate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As fast as forward erst now backward to retrate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like as the tide, that comes fro th' Ocean mayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flowes up the Shenan with contrarie forse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And over-ruling him in his owne rayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drives backe the current of his kindly course,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And makes it seeme to have some other sourse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when the floud is spent, then backe againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His borrowed waters forst to redisbourse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He sends the sea his owne with double gaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tribute eke withall, as to his Soveraine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus did the battell varie to and fro,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With diverse fortune doubtfull to be deemed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now this the better had, now had his fo;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then he halfe vanquisht, then the other seemed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet victors both them selves alwayes esteemed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the while the disentrayled blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adowne their sides like litle rivers stremed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with the wasting of his vitall flood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sir Triamond at last full faint and feeble stood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Cambell still more strong and greater grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne felt his blood to wast, ne powres emperisht,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through that rings vertue, that with vigour new</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still when as he enfeebled was, him cherisht,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all his wounds, and all his bruses guarisht;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as a withered tree, through husbands toyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is often scene full freshly to have florisht,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fruitfull apples to have borne awhile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As fresh as when it first was planted in the soyle.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Through which advantage, in his strength he rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And smote the other with so wondrous might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That through the seame, which did his hauberk close,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into his throate and life it pierced quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That downe he fell as dead in all mens sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet dead he was not, yet he sure did die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As all men do, that lose the living spright.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So did one soule out of his bodie flie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto her native home from mortall miserie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But nathelesse, whilst all the lookers-on</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him dead behight, as he to all appeard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All unawares he started up anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one that had out of a dreame bene reard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fresh assayld his foe: who halfe affeard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of th'uncouth sight, as he some ghost had scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stood still amaz'd, holding his idle sweard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till, having often by him stricken beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He forced was to strike, and save himselfe from teene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet from thenceforth more warily he fought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one in feare the Stygian gods t'offend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne followd on so fast, but rather sought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him selfe to save, and daunger to defend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then life and labour both in vaine to spend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Triamond perceiving weened sure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan to faint toward the battels end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that he should not long on foote endure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A signe which did to him the victorie assure.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whereof full blith eftsoones his mightie hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He heav'd on high, in mind with that same blow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make an end of all that did withstand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Cambell seeing come was nothing slow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him selfe to save from that so deadly throw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at that instant reaching forth his sweard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Close underneath his shield, that scarce did show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stroke him, as he his hand to strike upreard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In th'arm-pit full, that through both sides the wound appeard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet still that direfull stroke kept on his way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, falling heavie on Cambelloes crest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strooke him so hugely that in swowne he lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his head an hideous wound imprest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sure, had it not happily found rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the brim of his brode-plated shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It would have cleft his braine downe to his brest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So both at once fell dead upon the field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And each to other seemd the vidtorie to yield.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when as all the lookers-on beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They weened sure the warre was at an end;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Judges rose, and Marshals of the field</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Broke up the listes, their armes away to rend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Canacee gan wayle her dearest frend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All suddenly they both upstarted light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The one out of the swownd, which him did blend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other breathing now another spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fiercely each assayling gan afresh to fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Long while they then continued in that wize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if but then the battell had begonne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strokes, wounds, wards, weapons, all they did despise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne either car'd to ward, or perill shonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Desirous both to have the battell donne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne either cared life to save or spill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne which of them did winne, ne which were wonne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So wearie both of fighting had their fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That life it selfe seemd loathsome, and long safetie ill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whilst thus the case in doubtfull ballance hong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unsure to whether side it would incline,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all mens eyes and hearts, which there among</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stood gazing, filled were with rufull tine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And secret feare, to see their fatall fine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All suddenly they heard a troublous noyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemd some perilous tumult to desine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Confusd with womens cries and shouts of boyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as the troubled Theatres oftimes annoy es.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereat the Champions both stood still a space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weeten what that sudden clamour ment:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lo! where they spyde with speedie whirling pace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One in a charet of straunge furniment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Towards them driving, like a storme out sent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The charet decked was in wondrous wize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With gold and many a gorgeous ornament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After the Persian Monarks antique guize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as the maker selfe could best by art devize.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Much more of price and of more gratious powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is this, then that same water of Ardenne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which Rinaldo drunck in happie howre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Described by that famous Tuscane penne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that had might to change the hearts of men</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fro love to hate, a change of evill choise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But this doth hatred make in love to brenne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heavy heart with comfort doth rejoyce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who would not to this vertue rather yeeld his voice?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last arriving by the listes side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee with her rod did softly smite the raile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which straight flew ope, and gave her way to ride.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones out of her Coch she gan availe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pacing fairely forth did bid all haile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First to her brother, whom she loved deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That so to see him made her heart to quaile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And next to Cambell, whose sad ruefull cheare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made her to change her hew, and hidden love t'appeare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They lightly her requit, (for small delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They had as then her long to entertaine)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eft them turned both againe to fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when she saw, downe on the bloudy plaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her selfe she threw, and teares gan shed amaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst her teares immixing prayers meeke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with her prayers reasons, to restraine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From blouddy strife, and blessed peace to seeke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By all that unto them was deare, did them beseeke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when as all might nought with them prevaile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee smote them lightly with her powrefull wand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then suddenly, as if their hearts did faile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their wrathfull blades downe fell out of their hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And they, like men astonisht, still did stand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus whilest their minds were doubtfully distraught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mighty spirites bound with mightier band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her golden cup to them for drinke she raught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereof, full glad for thirst, ech drunk an harty draught;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Of which so soone as they once tasted had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wonder it is that sudden change to see:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Instead of strokes, each other kissed glad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lovely haulst, from feare of treason free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And plighted hands for ever friends to be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When all men saw this sudden change of things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So mortall foes so friendly to agree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For passing joy, which so great marvaile brings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They all gan shout aloud, that all the heaven rings.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All which when gentle Canacee beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hast she from her lofty chaire descended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet what sudden tidings was befeld:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where when she saw that cruell war so ended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And deadly foes so faithfully affrended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In lovely wise she gan that Lady greet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which had so great dismay so well amended:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, entertaining her with curt'sies meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Profest to her true friendship and affection sweet.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus when they all accorded goodly were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The trumpets sounded, and they all arose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence to depart with glee and gladsome chere.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those warlike champions both together chose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Homeward to march, themselves there to repose:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wise Cambina, taking by her side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Canacee, as fresh as morning rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto her Coch remounting, home did ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Admir'd of all the people and much glorifide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Where making joyous feast theire daies they spent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In perfect love, devoide of hatefull strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Allide with bands of mutuall couplement;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Triamond had Canacee to wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With whom he ledd a long and happie life;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Cambel tooke Cambina to his fere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which as life were to each other liefe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So all alike did love, and loved were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That since their dayes such lovers were not found elswhere.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-4" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Satyrane makes a Tourneyment</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">For love of Florimell:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Britomart winnes the prize from all,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And Artegall doth quell.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It often fals, (as here it earst befell)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That mortall foes doe turne to faithfull frends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And friends profest are chaungd to foemen fell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cause of both, of both their minds depends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And th'end of both likewise of both their ends:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For enmitie, that of no ill proceeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But of occasion, with th'occasion ends;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And friendship, which a faint affection breeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without regard of good, dyes like ill grounded seeds.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That well (me seemes) appeares, by that of late</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Twixt Cambell and Sir Triamond befell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As als by this, that now a new debate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stird up twixt Blandamour and Paridell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which by course befals me here to tell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who having those two other Knights espide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Marching afore, as ye remember well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sent forth their Squire to have them both descride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke those masked Ladies riding them beside.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who backe returning told, as he had scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they were doughtie knights of dreaded name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And those two Ladies their two loves unseene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therefore wisht them without blot or blame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To let them passe at will, for dread of shame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Blandamour full of vainglorious spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rather stird by his discordfull Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon them gladly would have prov'd his might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that he yet was sore of his late lucklesse fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet nigh approching he them fowle bespake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disgracing them, him selfe thereby to grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As was his wont: so weening way to make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Ladies love, where so he came in place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with lewd termes their lovers to deface.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose sharpe provokement them incenst so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That both were bent t'avenge his usage base,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gan their shields addresse them selves afore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For evill deedes may better then bad words be bore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But faire Cambina with perswasions myld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did mitigate the fiercenesse of their mode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That for the present they were reconcyld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gan to treate of deeds of armes abrode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strange adventures, all the way they rode:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst the which they told, as then befell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that great turney which was blazed brode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that rich girdle of faire Florimell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The prize of her which did in beautie most excell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To which folke-mote they all with one consent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith each of them his Ladie had him by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose beautie each of them thought excellent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Agreed to travell, and their fortunes try.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So as they passed forth they did espy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One in bright armes, with ready speare in rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That toward them his course seem'd to apply:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst whom Sir Paridell himselfe addrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him weening, ere he nigh approcht, to have represt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which th'other seeing gan his course relent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And vaunted speare eftsoones to disadvaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if he naught but peace and pleasure ment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now falne into their fellowship by chance:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat they shewed curteous countenaunce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So as he rode with them accompanide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His roving eie did on the Lady glaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Blandamour had riding by his side:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom sure he weend, that he some-wher tofore had eide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It was to weete that snowy Florimell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Ferrau late from Braggadochio wonne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom he now seeing, her remembred well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How having reft her from the witches sonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He soone her lost: wherefore he now begunne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To challenge her anew, as his owne prize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom formerly he had in battell wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And proffer made by force her to reprize:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which scornefull offer Blandamour gan soone despize;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And said, "Sir Knight, sith ye this Lady clame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom he that hath were loth to lose so light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(For so to lose a Lady were great shame)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yee shall her winne, as I have done, in fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lo! shee shall be placed here in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Together with this Hag beside her set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That who so winnes her may her have by right;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he shall have the Hag that is ybet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with her alwaies ride, till he another get."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That offer pleased all the company:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So Florimell with Ate forth was brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At which they all gan laugh full merrily;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Braggadochio said, he never thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For such an Hag, that seemed worse then nought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His person to emperill so in fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if to match that Lady they had sought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another like, that were like faire and bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His life he then would spend to justifie his right.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At which his vaine excuse they all gan smile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As scorning his unmanly cowardize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Florimell him fowly gan revile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That for her sake refus'd to enterprize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The battell, offred in so knightly wize:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Ate eke provokt him privily</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With love of her, and shame of such mesprize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But nought he car'd for friend or enemy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For in base mind nor friendship dwels nor enmity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Cambell thus did shut up all in jest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Brave Knights and Ladies, certes, ye doe wrong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To stirre up strife, when most us needeth rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That we may us reserve both fresh and strong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the Turneiment which is not long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When who so list to fight may fight his fill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till then your challenges ye may prolong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then it shall be tried, if ye will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether shall have the Hag, or hold the Lady still."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They all agreed: so, turning all to game</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pleasaunt bord, they past forth on their way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all that while, where so they rode or came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That masked Mock-knight was their sport and play.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that at length, upon th'appointed day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the place of turneyment they came;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where they before them found in fresh aray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Manie a brave knight and manie a daintie dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Assembled for to get the honour of that game.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There this faire crewe arriving did divide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them selves asunder: Blandamour with those</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his on th'one, the rest on th'other side.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But boastful Braggadochio rather chose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For glorie vaine, their fellowship to lose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That men on him the more might gaze alone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rest themselves in troupes did else dispose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as it seemed best to every one;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The knights in couples marcht with ladies linckt attone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then first of all forth came Sir Satyrane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bearing that precious relicke in an arke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of gold, that bad eyes might it not prophane:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which drawing softly forth out of the darke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He open shewd, that all men it mote marke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A gorgeous girdle, curiously embost</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With pearle and precious stone, worth many a marke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet did the workmanship farre passe the cost:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was the same which lately Florimel had lost.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The same aloft he hung in open vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be the prize of beautie and of might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which eftsoones discovered, to it drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The eyes of all, allur'd with close delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hearts quite robbed with so glorious sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all men threw out vowes and wishes vaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrise happie Ladie, and thrise happie knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them seemd that could so goodly riches gaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So worthie of the perill, worthy of the paine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then tooke the bold Sir Satyrane in hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An huge great speare, such as he wont to wield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, vauncing forth from all the other band</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of knights, addrest his maiden-headed shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shewing him selfe all ready for the field.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst whom there singled from the other side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Painim knight that well in armes was skild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And had in many a battell oft bene tride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right Bruncheval the bold, who fiersly forth did ride.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So furiously they both together met,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That neither could the others force sustaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As two fierce Buls, that strive the rule to get</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the heard, meete with so hideous maine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That both rebutted tumble on the plaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So these two champions to the ground were feld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where in a maze they both did long remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in their hands their idle troncheons held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which neither able were to wag, or once to weld.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when the noble Ferramont espide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He pricked forth in ayd of Satyran;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him against Sir Blandamour did ride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all the strength and stifnesse that he can.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the more strong and stiffely that he ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So much more sorely to the ground he fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That on an heape were tumbled horse and man:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto whose rescue forth rode Paridell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But him likewise with that same speare he eke did quell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which Braggadocchio seeing had no will</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hasten greatly to his parties ayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Albee his turne were next; but stood there still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one that seemed doubtfull or dismayd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Triamond, halfe wroth to see him staid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sternly stept forth and raught away his speare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which so sore he Ferramont assaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That horse and man to ground he quite did beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That neither could in hast themselves againe upreare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which to avenge Sir Devon him did dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with no better fortune then the rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For him likewise he quickly downe did smight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after him Sir Douglas him addrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after him Sir Palimord forth prest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But none of them against his strokes could stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, all the more, the more his praise increst:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For either they were left uppon the land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or went away sore wounded of his haplesse hand.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now by this Sir Satyrane abraid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the swowne, in which too long he lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And looking round about, like one dismaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When as he saw the mercilesse affray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which doughty Triamond had wrought that day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the noble Knights of Maidenhead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mighty heart did almost rend in tway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For very gall, that rather wholly dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Himselfe he wisht have beene, then in so bad a stead.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones he gan to gather up around</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His weapons which lay scattered all abrode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, as it fell, his steed he ready found;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On whom remounting fiercely forth he rode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like sparke of fire that from the andvile glode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There where he saw the valiant Triamond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Chasing, and laying on them heavy lode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none his force were able to withstond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So dreadfull were his strokes, so deadly was his hond.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that, at him his beam-like speare he aimed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thereto all his power and might applide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wicked steele, for mischiefe first ordained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And having now misfortune got for guide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Staid not till it arrived in his side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therein made a very griesly wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That streames of blood his armour all bedide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much was he daunted with that direfull stound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That scarse he him upheld from falling in a swound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet, as he might, himselfe he soft withdrew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the field, that none perceiv'd it plaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan the part of Chalengers anew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To range the field, and viftorlike to raine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none against them battell durst maintaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By that the gloomy evening on them fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That forced them from fighting to refraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And trumpets sound to cease did them compell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So Satyrane that day was judg'd to beare the bell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The morrow next the Turney gan anew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with the first the hardy Satyrane</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Appear'd in place, with all his noble crew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On th'other side full many a warlike swaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Assembled were, that glorious prize to gaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But mongst them all was not Sir Triamond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unable he new battell to darraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through grievaunce of his late received wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That doubly did him grieve when so himselfe he found.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which Cambell seeing, though he could not salve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne done undoe, yet, for to salve his name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And purchase honour in his friends behalve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This goodly counterfesaunce he did frame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The shield and armes, well knowne to be the same</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Triamond had worne, unwares to wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to his friend unwist, for doubt of blame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If he misdid, he on himselfe did dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That none could him discerne; and so went forth to fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There Satyrane Lord of the field he found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Triumphing in great joy and jolity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst whom none able was to stand on ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That much he gan his glorie to envy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cast t'avenge his friends indignity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A mightie speare eftsoones at him he bent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, seeing him come on so furiously,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Met him mid-way with equall hardiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That forcibly to ground they both together went.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They up againe them selves can lightly reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to their tryed swords them selves betake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which they wrought such wondrous marvels there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the rest it did amazed make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne any dar'd their perill to partake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now cuffing close, now chacing to and fro,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now hurtling round advantage for to take:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As two wild Boares together grapling go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chaufing and foming choler each against his fo.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So as they courst, and turneyd here and theare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It chaunst Sir Satyrane his steed at last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether through foundring or through sodein feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To stumble, that his rider nigh he cast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which vauntage Cambell did pursue so fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, ere him selfe he had recovered well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So sore he sowst him on the compast creast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That forced him to leave his loftie sell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rudely tumbling downe under his horse-feete fell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lightly Cambello leapt downe from his steed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For to have rent his shield and armes away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That whylome wont to be the victors meed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When all unwares he felt an hideous sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of many swords that lode on him did lay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An hundred knights had him enclosed round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To rescue Satyrane out of his pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which at once huge strokes on him did pound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In hope to take him prisoner, where he stood on ground.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He with their multitude was nought dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with stout courage turnd upon them all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his brondiron round about him layd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which he dealt large almes, as did befall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as a Lion, that by chaunce doth fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the hunters toile, doth rage and rore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In royall heart disdaining to be thrall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all in vaine: for what might one do more?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They have him taken captive, though it grieve him sore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whereof when newes to Triamond was brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There as he lay, his wound he soone forgot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And starting up streight for his armour sought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In vaine he sought, for there he found it not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cambello it away before had got.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cambelloes armes therefore he on him threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lightly issewd forth to take his lot.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There he in troupe found all that warlike crew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leading his friend away, full sorie to his vew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Into the thickest of that knightly preasse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He thrust, and smote downe all that was betweene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Caried with fervent zeale: ne did he ceasse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that he came where he had Cambell scene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like captive thral two other Knights atweene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There he amongst them cruell havocke makes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they, which lead him, soone enforced beene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To let him loose to save their proper stakes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, being freed, from one a weapon fiercely takes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that he drives at them with dreadfull might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both in remembrance of his friends late harme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in revengement of his owne despight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So both together give a new allarme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if but now the battell wexed warme.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As when two greedy Wolves doe breake by force</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into an heard, farre from the husband farme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They spoile and ravine without all remorse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So did these two through all the field their foes enforce.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Fiercely they followd on their bolde emprize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till trumpets sound did warne them all to rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then all with one consent did yeeld the prize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Triamond and Cambell as the best.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Triamond to Cambell it relest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Cambell it to Triamond transferd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each labouring t'advance the others gest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And make his praise before his owne preferd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that the doome was to another day differd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The last day came, when all those knightes againe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Assembled were their deedes of armes to shew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full many deedes that day were shewed plaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Satyrane, bove all the other crew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His wondrous worth declared in all mens view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For from the first he to the last endured:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And though some while Fortune from him withdrew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet evermore his honour he recured,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with unwearied powre his party still assured.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne was there Knight that ever thought of armes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that his utmost prowesse there made knowen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, by their many wounds and carelesse harmes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By shivered speares, and swords all under strowen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By scattered shields, was easie to be showen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There might ye see loose steeds at randon ronne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose lucklesse riders late were overthrowen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And squiers make hast to helpe their Lords fordonne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But still the Knights of Maidenhead the better wonne;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Till that there entered on the other side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A straunger knight, from whence no man could reed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In quyent disguise, full hard to be descride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all his armour was like salvage weed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With woody mosse bedight, and all his steed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With oaken leaves attrapt, that seemed fit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For salvage wight; and thereto well agreed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His word, which on his ragged shield was writ,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sahagesse sansjinesse, shewing secret wit.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He, at his first incomming, charg'd his spere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At him that first appeared in his sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was to weet the stout Sir Sangliere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who well was knowen to be a valiant Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Approved oft in many a perlous fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him at the first encounter downe he smote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And overbore beyond his crouper quight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after him another Knight, that hote</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sir Brianor, so sore that none him life behote.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then, ere his hand he reard, he overthrew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seven Knights, one after other as they came:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, when his speare was brust, his sword he drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The instrument of wrath, and with the same</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far'd like a lyon in his bloodie game,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hewing and slashing shields and helmets bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And beating downe what ever nigh him came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That every one gan shun his dreadfull sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No lesse then death it selfe, in daungerous affright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Much wondred all men what or whence he came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That did amongst the troupes so tyrannize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And each of other gan inquire his name.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when they could not learne it by no wize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most answerable to his wyld disguize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It seemed him to terme the Salvage Knight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But certes his right name was otherwize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though knowne to few, that Arthegall he hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The doughtiest knight that liv'd that day, and most of might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus was Sir Satyrane with all his band</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By his sole manhood and atchievement stout</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dismay'd, that none of them in field durst stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But beaten were and chased all about.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So he continued all that day throughout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till evening that the Sunne gan downward bend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then rushed forth out of the thickest rout</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A stranger knight, that did his glorie shend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So nought may be esteemed happie till the end.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He at his entrance charg'd his powrefull speare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At Artegall, in middest of his pryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therewith smote him on his Umbriere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So sore, that tombling backe he downe did slyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over his horses taile above a stryde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence litle lust he had to rise againe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Cambell seeing much the same envyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ran at him with all his might and maine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But shortly was likewise scene lying on the plaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whereat full inly wroth was Triamond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cast t'avenge the shame doen to his freend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by his friend himselfe eke soone he fond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In no lesse neede of helpe then him, he weend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which when Blandamour from end to end</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beheld, he woxe therewith displeased sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thought in mind it shortly to amend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His speare he feutred, and at him it bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But with no better fortune then the rest afore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Full many others at him likewise ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all of them likewise dismounted were;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne certes wonder, for no powre of man</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could bide the force of that enchaunted speare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which this famous Britomart did beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which she wondrous deeds of arms atchieved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And overthrew what ever came her neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all those stranger knights full sore agrieved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that late weaker band of chalengers relieved.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like as in sommers day, when raging heat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth burne the earth and boyled rivers drie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all brute beasts, forst to refraine fro meat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe hunt for shade, where shrowded they may lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, missing it, faine from themselves to flic;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All travellers tormented are with paine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A watry cloud doth overcast the skie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And poureth forth a sudden shoure of raine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all the wretched world recomforteth againe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So did the warlike Britomart restore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The prize to knights of Maydenhead that day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which else was like to have bene lost, and bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The prayse of prowesse from them all away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then shrilling trompets loudly gan to bray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bad them leave their labours and long toyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To joyous feast and other gentle play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where beauties prize shold win that pretious spoyle:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where I with sound of trompe will also rest a whyle.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-5" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The Ladies for the girdle strive</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of famous Florimell:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Scudamour; comming to Cares House.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Doth sleepe from him expell.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It hath bene through all ages ever scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with the praise of armes and chevalrie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The prize of beautie still hath joyned beene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that for reasons speciall privitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For either doth on other much relie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he, me seemes, most fit the faire to serve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That can her best defend from villenie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And she most fit his service doth deserve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That fairest is, and from her faith will never swerve.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So fitly now here commeth next in place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After the proofe of prowesse ended well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The controverse of beauties soveraine grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which, to her that doth the most excell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall fall the girdle of faire Florimell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That many wish to win for glorie vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And not for vertuous use, which some doe tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That glorious belt did in it selfe containe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which Ladies ought to love, and seeke for to obtaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That girdle gave the vertue of chast love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wivehood true, to all that did it beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But whosoever contrarie doth prove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might not the same about her middle wcare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But it would loose, or else asunder teare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilome it was (as Faeries wont report)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dame Venus girdle, by her steemed deare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What time she usd to live in wively sort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But layd aside when so she usd her looser sport.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her husband Vulcan whylome for her sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When first he loved her with heart entire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This pretious ornament, they say, did make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wrought in Lemno with unquenched fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And afterwards did for her loves first hire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Give it to her, for ever to remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith to bind lascivious desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And loose affections streightly to restraine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which vertue it for ever after did retaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The same one day, when she her selfe disposd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To visite her beloved Paramoure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The God of warre, she from her middle loosd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And left behind her in her secret bowre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On Acidalian mount, where many an howre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She with the pleasant Graces wont to play.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There Florimell, in her first ages flowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was fostered by those Graces, (as they say)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And brought with her from thence that goodly belt away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That goodly belt was Cestus hight by name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as her life by her esteemed deare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No wonder then, if that to winne the same</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So many Ladies sought, as shall appeare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For pearelesse she was thought that did it beare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now by this their feast all being ended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The judges, which thereto selected were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the Martian field adowne descended</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To deeme this doutfull case, for which they all contended.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But first was question made, which of those Knights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That lately turneyd had the wager wonne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There was it judged, by those worthie wights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Satyrane the first day best had donne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he last ended, having first begonne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The second was to Triamond behight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that he sav'd the viclxmr from fordonne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Cambell viclour was in all mens sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till by mishap he in his foemens hand did light.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The third dayes prize unto that straunger Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom all men term'd Knight of the Hebene speare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Britomart was given by good right;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that with puissant stroke she downe did beare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Salvage Knight that victour was whileare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the rest which had the best afore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the last unconquer'd did appeare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For last is deemed best. To her therefore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fayrest Ladie was adjudgd for Paramore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But thereat greatly grudged Arthegall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And much repynd, that both of vidtors meede</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke of honour she did him forestall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet mote he not withstand what was decreede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But inly thought of that despightfull deede</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fit time t'awaite avenged for to bee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This being ended thus, and all agreed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then next ensew'd the Paragon to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of beauties praise, and yeeld the fayrest her due fee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then first Cambello brought into their view</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His faire Cambina, covered with a veale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, being once withdrawne, most perfect hew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And passing beautie did eftsoones reveale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That able was weake harts away to steale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Next did Sir Triamond unto their sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The face of his deare Canacee unheale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose beauties beame eftsoones did shine so bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That daz'd the eyes of all as with exceeding light.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And after her did Paridell produce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His false Duessa, that she might be scene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who with her forged beautie did seduce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hearts of some that fairest her did weene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As diverse wits affecled divers beene.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then did Sir Ferramont unto them shew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His Lucida, that was full faire and sheene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after these an hundred Ladies moe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Appear'd in place, the which each other did outgoe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All which who so dare thinke for to enchace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him needeth sure a golden pen, I weene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tell the feature of each goodly face:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, since the day that they created beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So many heavenly faces were not scene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Assembled in one place: ne he that thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Chian folke to pourtraicl beauties Queene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By view of all the fairest to him brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So many faire did see as here he might have sought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last, the most redoubted Britonesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her lovely Amoret did open shew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose face, discovered, plainely did expresse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The heavenly pourtraict of bright Angels hew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well weened all, which her that time did vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she should surely beare the bell away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till Blandamour, who thought he had the trew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And very Florimell, did her display,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sight of whom once scene did all the rest dismay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For all afore that seemed fayre and bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now base and contemptible did appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Compar'd to her that shone as Phebes light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst the lesser starres in evening cleare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All that her saw with wonder ravisht weare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And weend no mortall creature she should bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But some celestiall shape that flesh did beare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet all were glad there Florimell to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet thought that Florimell was not so faire as shee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As guilefull Goldsmith that by secret skill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With golden foyle doth finely over-spred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some baser metall, which commend he will</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the vulgar for good gold insted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He much more goodly glosse thereon doth shed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hide his falshood, then if it were trew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So hard this Idole was to be ared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Florimell her selfe in all mens vew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She seem'd to passe: so forged things do fairest shew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then was that golden belt by doome of all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Graunted to her, as to the fayrest Dame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which being brought, about her middle small</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They thought to gird, as best it her became,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by no meanes they could it thereto frame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, ever as they fastned it, it loos'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fell away, as feeling secret blame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full oft about her wast she it enclos'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And it as oft was from about her wast disclos'd:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That all men wondred at the uncouth sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And each one thought as to their fancies came.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she her selfe did thinke it doen for spight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And touched was with secret wrath and shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith, as thing deviz'd her to defame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then many other Ladies likewise tride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About their tender loynes to knit the same;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But it would not on none of them abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when they thought it fast, eftsoones it was untide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when that scornefull Squire of Dames did vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He lowdly gan to laugh, and thus to jest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Alas! for pittie that so faire a crew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As like can not be scene from East to West,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cannot find one this girdle to invest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fie on the man that did it first invent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To shame us all with this Ungirt unblest I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let never Ladie to his love assent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That hath this day so many so unmanly shent."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereat all Knights gan laugh, and Ladies lowre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that at last the gentle Amoret</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Likewise assayd to prove that girdles powre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, having it about her middle set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did find it fit withouten breach or let.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat the rest gan greatly to envie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Florimell exceedingly did fret,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And snatching from her hand halfe angrily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The belt againe, about her body gan it tie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet nathemore would it her bodie fit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet nathelesse to her, as her dew right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It yielded was by them that judged it:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And she her selfe adjudged to the Knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That bore the Hebene speare, as wonne in fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Britomart would not thereto assent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne her owne Amoret forgoe so light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that strange Dame, whose beauties wonderment</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She lesse esteem'd then th'others vertuous government.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when the rest did see her to refuse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They were full glad, in hope themselves to get her:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet at her choice they all did greatly muse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, after that, the judges did arret her</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the second best that lov'd her better;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was the Salvage Knight: but he was gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In great displeasure that he could not get her.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then was she judged Triamond his one;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Triamond lov'd Canacee, and other none.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho unto Satyran she was adjudged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who was right glad to gaine so goodly meed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Blandamour thereat full greatly grudged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And litle prays'd his labours evill speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That for to winne the saddle lost the steed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne lesse thereat did Paridell complaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thought t'appeale from that which was decreed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To single combat with Sir Satyrane:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereto him Ate stird, new discord to maintaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And eke, with these, full many other Knights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She through her wicked working did incense</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her to demaund and chalenge as their rights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deserved for their perils recompense.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst the rest, with boastfull vaine pretense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stept Braggadochio forth, and as his thrall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her claym'd, by him in battell wonne long sens:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereto her selfe he did to witnesse call;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, being askt, accordingly confessed all.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereat exceeding wroth was Satyran;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wroth with Satyran was Blandamour;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wroth with Blandamour was Erivan;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at them both Sir Paridell did loure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So all together stird up strifull stoure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And readie were new battell to darraine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each one profest to be her paramoure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And vow'd with speare and shield it to maintaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne Judges powre, ne reasons rule, mote them restraine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which troublous stirre when Satyrane aviz'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan to cast how to appease the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to accord them all this meanes deviz'd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First in the midst to set that fayrest Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom each one his chalenge should disclame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he himselfe his right would eke releasse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, looke to whom she voluntarie came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He should without disturbance her possesse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweete is the love that comes alone with willingnesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They all agreed: and then that snowy Mayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was in the middest plast among them all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All on her gazing wisht, and vowd, and prayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the Queene of beautie close did call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she unto their portion might befall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, when she long had lookt upon each one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As though she wished to have pleasd them all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last to Braggadochio selfe alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She came of her accord, in spight of all his fone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when they all beheld they chaft, and rag'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And woxe nigh mad for very harts despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from revenge their willes they scarce asswag'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some thought from him her to have reft by might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some proffer made with him for her to fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he nought car'd for all that they could say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he their words as wind esteemed light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet not fit place he thought it there to stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But secretly from thence that night her bore away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They which remaynd, so soone as they perceiv'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she was gone, departed thence with speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And follow'd them, in mind her to have reav'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From wight unworthie of so noble meed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which poursuit how each one did succeede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall else be told in order, as it fell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But now of Britomart it here doth neede</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hard adventures and strange haps to tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since with the rest she went not after Florimell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For soone as she them saw to discord set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her list no longer in that place abide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, taking with her lovely Amoret,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon her first adventure forth did ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke her lov'd, making blind love her guide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unluckie Mayd, to seeke her enimie!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unluckie Mayd, to seeke him farre and wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom, when he was unto her selfe most nie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She through his late disguizement could him not descrie!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So much the more her griefe, the more her toyle:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet neither toyle nor griefe she once did spare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In seeking him that should her paine assoyle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereto great comfort in her sad misfare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was Amoret, companion of her care:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who likewise sought her lover long miswent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gentle Scudamour, whose heart whileare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That stryfull hag with gealous discontent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had fild, that he to fell reveng was fully bent:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Bent to revenge on blamelesse Britomart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The crime which cursed Ate kindled earst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which like thornes did pricke his gealous hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through his soule like poysned arrow perst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That by no reason it might be reverst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ought that Glauce could or doe or say.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, aye the more that she the same reherst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The more it gauld and griev'd him night and day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That nought but dire revenge his anger mote defray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So as they travelled, the drouping night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Covered with cloudie storme and bitter showre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That dreadfull seem'd to every living wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon them fell, before her timely howre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That forced them to seeke some covert bowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where they might hide their heads in quiet rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shrowd their persons from that stormie stowre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not farre away, not meet for any guest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They spide a little cottage, like some poore mans nest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Under a steepe hilles side it placed was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There where the mouldred earth had cav'd the banke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fast beside a little brooke did pas</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of muddie water, that like puddle stanke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which few crooked sallowes grew in ranke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereto approaching nigh they heard the sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of many yron hammers beating ranke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And answering their wearie turnes around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That seemed some blacksmith dwelt in that desert ground.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There entring in, they found the goodman selfe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full busily unto his worke ybent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who was to weet a wretched wearish elfe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hollow eyes and rawbone cheekes forspent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if he had in prison long bene pent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full blacke and griesly did his face appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besmeard with smoke that nigh his eye-sight blent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With rugged beard, and hoarie shagged heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which he never wont to combe, or comely sheare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Rude was his garment, and to rags all rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne better had he, ne for better cared:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With blistred hands emongst the cinders brent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fingers filthie with long nayles unpared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right fit to rend the food on which he fared.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His name was Care; a blacksmith by his trade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That neither day nor night from working spared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to small purpose yron wedges made;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those be unquiet thoughts that carefull minds invade.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In which his worke he had sixe servants prest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About the Andvile standing evermore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With huge great hammers, that did never rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From heaping stroakes which thereon soused sore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All sixe strong groomes, but one then other more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For by degrees they all were disagreed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So likewise did the hammers which they bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like belles in greatnesse orderly succeed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he which was the last the first did farre exceede.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He like a monstrous Gyant seem'd in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Farre passing Bronteus or Pyracmon great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which in Lipari doe day and night</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Frame thunderbolts for Joves avengefull threate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So dreadfully he did the and vile beat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seem'd to dust he shortly would it drive:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So huge his hammer, and so fierce his heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seem'd a rocke of Diamond it could rive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rend asunder quite, if he thereto list strive.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sir Scudamour there entring much admired</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The manner of their worke and wearie paine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, having long beheld, at last enquired</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cause and end thereof, but all in vaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For they for nought would from their worke refraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne let his speeches come unto their eare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the breathfull bellowes blew amaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to the Northern winde, that none could heare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those Pensifenesse did move; and Sighes the bellows weare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when that warriour saw, he said no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in his armour layd him down to rest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To rest he layd him downe upon the flore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Whylome for ventrous Knights the bedding best)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thought his wearie limbs to have redrest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that old aged Dame, his faithfull Squire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her feeble joynts layd eke adowne to rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That needed much her weake age to desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After so long a travell which them both did tire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There lay Sir Scudamour long while expecting</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When gentle sleepe his heavie eyes would close;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oft chaunging sides, and oft new place electing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where better seem'd he mote himselfe repose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oft in wrath he thence againe uprose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oft in wrath he layd him downe againe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wheresoever he did himselfe dispose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He by no meanes could wished ease obtaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So every place seem'd painefull, and ech changing vaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And evermore, when he to sleepe did thinke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hammers sound his senses did molest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evermore, when he began to winke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bellowes noyse disturb'd his quiet rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne suffred sleepe to settle in his brest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the night the dogs did barke and howle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About the house, at sent of stranger guest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now the crowing Cocke, and now the Owle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lowde shriking, him afflicted to the very sowle.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, if by fortuneany litle nap</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his heavie eye-lids chaunst to fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones one of those villeins him did rap</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his headpeece with his yron mall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he was soone awaked therewithall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lightly started up as one affrayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or as if one him suddenly did call:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So oftentimes he out of sleepe abrayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then lay musing long on that him ill apayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So long he muzed, and so long he lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That at the last his wearie sprite, opprest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With fleshly weaknesse, which no creature may</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long time resist, gave place to kindly rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all his senses did full soone arrest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet in his soundest sleepe his dayly feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His ydle braine gan busily molest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made him dreame those two disloyall were:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The things, that day most minds, at night doe most appeare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that the wicked carle, the maister Smith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A paire of red-whot yron tongs did take</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the burning cinders, and therewith</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under his side him nipt; that, forst to wake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He felt his hart for very paine to quake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And started up avenged for to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On him the which his quiet slomber brake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, looking round about him, none could see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet did the smart remaine, though he himselfe did flee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In such disquiet and hart-fretting payne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He all that night, that too long night, did passe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now the day out of the Ocean mayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began to peepe above this earthly masse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With pearly dew sprinkling the morning grasse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then up he rose, like heavie lumpe of lead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in his face, as in a looking glasse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The signes of anguish one mote plainely read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ghesse the man to be dismayd with gealous dread.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Unto his lofty steede he clombe anone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And forth upon his former voiage fared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with him eke that aged Squire attone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, whatsoever perill was prepared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both equall paines and equall perill shared;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The end whereof and daungerous event</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall for another canticle be spared:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But here my wearie teeme, nigh over spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall breath it selfe awhile after so long a went.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-6" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Both Scudamour and Arthegall</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Doe fight with Britomart:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He sees her fare: doth fall in love,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And soone from her depart.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>What equall torment to the griefe of mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pyning anguish hid in gentle hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That inly feeds it selfe with thoughts unkind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And nourisheth her owne consuming smart?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What medicine can any Leaches art</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yeeld such a sore, that doth her grievance hide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And will to none her maladie impart?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such was the wound that Scudamour did gride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which Dan Phebus selfe cannot a salve provide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who having left that restlesse house of Care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The next day, as he on his way did ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of melancholic and sad misfare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through misconceipt, all unawares espide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An armed Knight under a forrest side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sitting in shade beside his grazing steede;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, soone as them approaching he descride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan towards them to pricke with eger speede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That seem'd he was full bent to some mischievous deede.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which Scudamour perceiving forth issewed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To have rencountred him in equall race;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But soone as th'other nigh approaching vewed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The armes he bore, his speare he gan abase</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And voide his course: at which so suddain case</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He wondred much. But th'other thus can say:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ah, gentle Scudamour! unto your grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I me submit, and you of pardon pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That almost had against you trespassed this day."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whereto thus Scudamour: "Small harme it were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For any knight upon a ventrous knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without displeasance for to prove his spere.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But reade you, Sir, sith ye my name have hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What is your owne, that I mote you requite?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Certes," (sayd he) "ye mote as now excuse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me from discovering you my name aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For time yet serves that I the same refuse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But call ye me the Salvage Knight, as others use."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Then this, Sir Salvage Knight," (quoth he) "areede</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or doe you here within this forrest wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemeth well to answere to your weede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or have ye it for some occasion donne?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That rather seemes, sith knowen armes ye shonne."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"This other day" (sayd he) "a stranger knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shame and dishonour hath unto me donne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On whom I waite to wreake that foule despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When ever he this way shall passe by day or night."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Shame be his meede," (quoth he) "that meaneth shame!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But what is he by whom ye shamed were?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"A stranger knight," sayd he, "unknowne by name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But knowne by fame, and by an Hebene speare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which he all that met him downe did beare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He, in an open Turney lately held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fro me the honour of that game did reare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And having me, all wearie earst, downe feld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fayrest Ladie reft, and ever since withheld."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When Scudamour heard mention of that speare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He wist right well that it was Britomart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which from him his fairest love did beare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho gan he swell in every inner part</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For fell despight, and gnaw his gealous hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That thus he sharply sayd: "Now, by my head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet is not this the first unknightly part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which that same knight, whom by his launce I read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath doen to noble knights, that many makes him dread:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"For lately he my love hath fro me reft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke defiled with foule villanie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sacred pledge which in his faith was left,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In shame of knighthood and fidelitie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which ere long full deare he shall abie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if to that avenge by you decreed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This hand may helpe, or succour ought supplie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It shall not fayle when so ye shall it need."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So both to wreake their wrathes on Britomart agreed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whiles thus they communed, lo! farre away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Knight soft ryding towards them they spyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Attyr'd in forraine armes and straunge aray:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom, when they nigh approcht, they plaine descryde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be the same for whom they did abyde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sayd then Sir Scudamour: "Sir Salvage knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let me this crave, sith first I was defyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That first I may that wrong to him requite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, if I hap to fayle, you shall recure my right."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which being yeelded, he his threatfull speare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan fewter, and against her fiercely ran.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who soone as she him saw approching neare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With so fell rage, her selfe she lightly gan</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To dight, to welcome him well as she can;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But entertaind him in so rude a wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to the ground she smote both horse and man;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence neither greatly hasted to arise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But on their common harmes together did devise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Artegall, beholding his mischaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">New matter added to his former fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, eft aventring his steele-headed launce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against her rode, full of despiteous ire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nought but spoyle and vengeance did require:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to himselfe his felonous intent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Returning disappointed his desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles unawares his saddle he forwent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And found himselfe on ground in great amazement.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lightly he started up out of that stound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And snatching forth his direfull deadly blade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did leape to her, as doth an eger hound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrust to an Hynd within some covert glade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom without perill he cannot invade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With such fell greedines he her assayled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That though she mounted were, yet he her made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To give him ground, (so much his force prevayled)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shun his mightie strokes, gainst which no armes avayled.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So, as they coursed here and there, it chaunst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, in her wheeling round, behind her crest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So sorely he her strooke, that thence it glaunst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adowne her backe, the which it fairely blest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From foule mischance; ne did it ever rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till on her horses hinder parts it fell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where byting deepe so deadly it imprest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That quite it chynd his backe behind the sell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to alight on foote her algates did compell:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like as the lightning brond from riven skie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throwne out by angry Jove in his vengeance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With dreadfull force falles on some steeple hie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which battring downe, it on the church doth glance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And teares it all with terrible mischance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet she no whit dismayd her steed forsooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, casting from her that enchaunted launce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto her sword and shield her soone betooke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therewithall at him right furiously she strooke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So furiously she strooke in her first heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles with long fight on foot he breathlesse was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she him forced backward to retreat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yeeld unto her weapon way to pas:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose raging rigour neither steele nor bras</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could stay, but to the tender flesh it went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pour'd the purple bloud forth on the gras;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all his mayle yriv'd, and plates yrent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shew'd all his bodie bare unto the cruell dent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At length, when as he saw her hastie heat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abate, and panting breath begin to fayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He, through long sufferance growing now more great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rose in his strength, and gan her fresh assayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Heaping huge strokes as thicke as showre of hayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lashing dreadfully at every part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if he thought her soule to disentrayle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah, cruell hand! and thrise more cruell hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That workst such wrecke on her to whom thou dearest art!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>What yron courage ever could endure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To worke such outrage on so faire a creature;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his madnesse thinke with hands impure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To spoyle so goodly workmanship of nature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The maker selfe resembling in her feature!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Certes some hellish furie or some feend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This mischiefe framd for their first loves defeature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bath their hands in bloud of dearest freend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereby to make their loves beginning their lives end.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus long they trac'd and traverst to and fro,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes pursewing, and sometimes pursewed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still as advantage they espyde thereto:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But toward th'end Sir Arthegall renewed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His strength still more, but she still more decrewed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last his lucklesse hand he heav'd on hie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having his forces all in one accrewed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therewith stroke at her so hideouslie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That seemed nought but death mote be her destinie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The wicked stroke upon her helmet chaunst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with the force, whiche in it selfe it bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her ventayle shard away, and thence forth glaunst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adowne in vaine, ne harm'd her any more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that her angels face, unseene afore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to the ruddie morne appeard in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deawed with silver drops through sweating sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But somewhat redder then beseem'd aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through toylesome heate and labour of her weary fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And round about the same her yellow heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having through stirring loosd their wonted band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to a golden border did appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Framed in goldsmithes forge with cunning hand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet goldsmithes cunning could not understand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To frame such subtile wire, so shinie cleare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For it did glister like the golden sand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which Padtolus with his waters shere</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Throwes forth upon the rivage round about him nere.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And as his hand he up againe did reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thinking to worke on her his utmost wracke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His powrelesse arme, benumbd with secret feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From his revengefull purpose shronke abacke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cruell sword out of his fingers slacke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fell downe to ground; as if the steele had sence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And felt some ruth or sence his hand did lacke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or both of them did thinke obedience</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To doe to so divine a beauties excellence.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And he himselfe, long gazing thereupon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last fell humbly downe upon his knee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of his wonder made religion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weening some heavenly goddesse he did see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or else unweeting what it else might bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pardon her besought his errour frayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That had done outrage in so high degree:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilest trembling horrour did his sense assayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made ech member quake, and manly hart to quayle.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nathelesse she, full of wrath for that late stroke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All that long while upheld her wrathfull hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With fell intent on him to bene y wroke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, looking sterne, still over him did stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Threatning to strike unlesse he would withstand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bad him rise, or surely he should die.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, die or live, for nought he would upstand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But her of pardon prayd more earnestlie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or wreake on him her will for so great injurie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when as Scudamour, who now abrayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beheld, whereas he stood not farre aside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He was therewith right wondrously dismayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And drawing nigh, when as he plaine descride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That peerelesse paterne of Dame Natures pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heavenly image of perfection,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He blest himselfe as one sore terrifide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, turning feare to faint devotion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did worship her as some celestiall vision.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Glauce, seeing all that chaunced there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well weeting how their errour to assoyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full glad of so good end, to them drew nere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her salewd with seemely bel-accoyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Joyous to see her safe after long toyle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then her besought, as she to her was deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To graunt unto those warriours truce a whyle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which yeelded, they their bevers up did reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shew'd themselves to her such as indeed they were.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When Britomart with sharpe avizefull eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beheld the lovely face of Artegall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tempred with sternesse and stout majestic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She gan eftsoones it to her mind to call</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be the same which in her fathers hall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long since in that enchaunted glasse she saw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith her wrathfull courage gan appall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And haughtie spirits meekely to adaw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That her enhaunced hand she downe Can soft withdraw.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet she it forst to have againe upheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As fayning choler which was turn'd to cold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But ever when his visage she beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her hand fell downe, and would no longer hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wrathfull weapon gainst his countnance bold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when in vaine to fight she oft assayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She arm'd her tongue, and thought at him to scold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nathlesse her tongue not to her will obayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But brought forth speeches myld when she would have missayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Scudamour, now woxen inly glad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all his gealous feare he false had found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And how that Hag his love abused had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With breach of faith and loyaltie unsound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which long time his grieved hart did wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him thus bespake: "Certes, Sir Artegall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I joy to see you lout so low on ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now become to live a Ladies thrall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That whylome in your minde wont to despise them all.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as she heard the name of Artegall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her hart did leape, and all her hart-strings tremble,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For sudden joy and secret feare withall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all her vitall powres, with motion nimble</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To succour it, themselves gan there assemble;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That by the swift recourse of flushing blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right plaine appeard, though she it would dissemble,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fayned still her former angry mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thinking to hide the depth by troubling of the flood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When Glauce thus gan wisely all upknit:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ye gentle Knights, whom fortune here hath brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be spectators of this uncouth fit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which secret fate hath in this Ladie wrought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the course of kind, ne mervaile nought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne thenceforth feare the thing that hethertoo</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath troubled both your mindes with idle thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fearing least she your loves away should woo:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feared in vaine, sith meanes, ye see, there wants theretoo.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And you, Sir Artegall, the salvage knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Henceforth may not disdaine that womans hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath conquered you anew in second fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For whylome they have conquerd sea and land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heaven it selfe, that nought may them withstand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne henceforth be rebellious unto love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is the crowne of knighthood, and the band</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of noble minds derived from above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, being knit with vertue, never will remove.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And you, faire Ladie knight, my dearest Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Relent the rigour of your wrathfull will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose fire were better turn'd to other flame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, wiping out remembrance of all ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Graunt him your grace; but so that he fulfill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The penance which ye shall to him empart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For lovers heaven must passe by sorrowes hell."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereat full inly blushed Britomart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Artegall close smyling joy'd in secret hart.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet durst he not make love so suddenly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne thinke th'affection of her hart to draw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From one to other so quite contrary:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besides her modest countenance he saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So goodly grave, and full of princely aw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it his ranging fancie did refraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And looser thoughts to lawfull bounds withdraw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereby the passion grew more fierce and faine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like to a stubborne steede whom strong hand would restraine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Scudamour, whose hart twixt doubtfull feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And feeble hope hung all this while suspence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Desiring of his Amoret to heare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some gladfull newes and sure intelligence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her thus bespake: "But, Sir, without offence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mote I request you tydings of my love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Amoret, sith you her freed fro thence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where she, captived long, great woes did prove;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That where ye left I may her seeke, as doth behove."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom thus Britomart: "Certes, Sir knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What is of her become, or whether reft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I can not unto you aread a right:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For from that time I from enchaunters theft</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her freed, in which ye her all hopelesse left,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I her preserv'd from perill and from feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evermore from villenie her kept:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever was there wight to me more deare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then she, ne unto whom I more true love did beare:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Till on a day, as through a desert wyld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We travelled, both wearie of the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We did alight, and sate in shadow myld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where fearelesse I to sleepe me downe did lay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when as I did out of sleepe abray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I found her not where I her left whyleare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But thought she wandred was, or gone astray:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I cal'd her loud, I sought her farre and neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But no where could her find, nor tydings of her heare."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When Scudamour those heavie tydings heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His hart was thrild with point of deadly feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne in his face or bloud or life appeard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But senselesse stood, like to a mazed steare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That yet of mortall stroke the stound doth beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till Glauce thus: "Faire Sir, be nought dismayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With needlesse dread, till certaintie ye heare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For yet she may be safe though somewhat strayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its best to hope the best, though of the worst affrayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nathlesse he hardly of her chearefull speech</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did comfort take, or in his troubled sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shew'd change of better cheare: so sore a breach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sudden newes had made into his spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till Britomart him fairely thus behight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Great cause of sorrow certes, Sir, ye have;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But comfort take; for, by this heavens light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I vow you dead or living not to leave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till I her find, and wreake on him that did her reave."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith he rested, and well pleased was:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Peace being confirm'd amongst them all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They tooke their steeds, and forward thence did pas</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto some resting place, which mote befall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All being guided by Sir Artegall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where goodly solace was unto them made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dayly feasting both in bowre and hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill that they their wounds well healed had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wearie limmes recur' d after late usage bad.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In all which time Sir Artegall made way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the love of noble Britomart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with meeke service and much suit did lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Continuall siege unto her gentle hart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, being whylome launcht with lovely dart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More eath was new impression to receive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How ever she her paynd with womanish art</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hide her wound, that none might it perceive:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vaine is the art that seekes it selfe for to deceive.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So well he woo'd her, and so well he wrought her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With faire entreatie and sweet blandishment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That at the length unto a bay he brought her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So as she to his speeches was content</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To lend an eare, and softly to relent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last, through many vowes which forth he pour'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many othes, she yeelded her consent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be his love, and take him for her Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till they with mariage meet might finish that accord.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho, when they had long time there taken rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir Artegall, who all this while was bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon an hard adventure yet in quest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fit time for him thence to depart it found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To follow that which he did long propound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto her his congee came to take;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But her therewith full sore displeasd he found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And loth to leave her late betrothed make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her dearest love full loth so shortly to forsake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet he with strong perswasions her asswaged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wonne her will to suffer him depart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which his faith with her he fast engaged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thousand vowes from bottome of his hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, all so soone as he by wit or art</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could that atchieve whereto he did aspire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He unto her would speedily revert:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No longer space thereto he did desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But till the horned moone three courses did expire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With which she for the present was appeased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yeelded leave, how ever malcontent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She inly were and in her mind displeased.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So, early in the morrow next, he went</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth on his way to which he was ybent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne wight him to attend, or way to guide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As whylome was the custome ancient</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst Knights when on adventures they did ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save that she algates him a while accompanide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And by the way she sundry purpose found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of this or that, the time for to delay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of the perils whereto he was bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The feare whereof seem'd much her to affray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all she did was but to weare out day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full oftentimes she leave of him did take;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eft againe deviz'd some what to say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which she forgot, whereby excuse to make;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So loth she was his companie for to forsake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last, when all her speeches she had spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And new occasion fayld her more to find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She left him to his fortunes government,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And backe returned with right heavie mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Scudamour, whom she had left behind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With whom she went to seeke faire Amoret,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her second care, though in another kind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For vertues onely sake, which doth beget</span>
					<br/>
					<span>True love and faithfull friendship, she by her did set.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Backe to that desert forrest they retyred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where sorie Britomart had lost her late;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There they her sought, and every where inquired</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where they might tydings get of her estate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet found they none. But by what haplesse fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or hard misfortune she was thence convayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stolne away from her beloved mate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were long to tell; therefore, I here will stay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Untill another tyde that I it finish may.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-7" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Amoret rapt by greedie Lust</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Belphebe saves from death:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Squire her loves; and being blam'd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">His daies in dole doth lead.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Great God of love, that with thy cruell darts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doest conquer greatest conquerors on ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And setst thy kingdome in the captive harts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Kings and Keasars to thy service bound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What glorie, or what guerdon hast thou found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In feeble Ladies tyranning so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And adding anguish to the bitter wound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which their lives thou lanchedst long afore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By heaping stormes of trouble on them daily more?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So whylome didst thou to faire Florimell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so and so to noble Britomart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So doest thou now to her of whom I tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The lovely Amoret, whose gentle hart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou martyrest with sorow and with smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In salvage forrests and in deserts wide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Beares and Tygers taking heavie part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withouten comfort and withouten guide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That pittie is to heare the perils which she tride.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So soooc as die with that brave Britonesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had left that Turneyment for beauties prise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They travel'd long; that now for weannesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both of the way and warlike exercise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both through a forest ryding did devise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T'alight, and rest their wearie limbs awhile.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There heavie sleepe the eye-lids did surprise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Britomart, after long tedious toyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That did her passed paines in quiet rest assoyle.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The whiles faire Amoret, of nought affeard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Walkt through die wood, for pleasure or for need;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When suddenly behind her backe she heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One rushing forth out of the thickest weed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, ere she backe could turne to taken heed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had unawares her snatched up from ground:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Feebly she shriekt, but so feebly indeed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Britomart heard not the shrilling sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There where through weary travel she lay sleeping sound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It was to weet a wilde and salvage man;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was no man, but onely like in shape,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke in stature higher by a span;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All overgrowne with haire, that could awhape</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An hardy hart; and his wide, mouth did gape</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With huge great teeth, like to a tusked Bore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he liv'd all on ravin and on rape</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of men and beasts; and fed on fleshly gore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The signe whereof yet stain'd his bloudy lips afore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His neather lip was not like man nor beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But like a wide deepe poke, downe hanging low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which he wont the relickes of his feast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cruell spoyle, which he had spard, to stow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And over it his huge great nose did grow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full dreadfully empurpled all with bloud;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And downe both sides two wide long eares did glow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And raught downe to his waste when up he stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More great then th'eares of Elephants by Indus flood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His wast was with a wreath of yvie greene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Engirt about, ne other garment wore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all his haire was like a garment scene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his hand a tall young oake he bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose knottie snags were sharpned all afore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And beath'd in fire for steele to be in sted.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But whence he was, or of what wombe ybore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of beasts, or of the earth, I have not red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But certes was with milke of Wolves and Tygres fed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This ugly creature in his armes her snatcht,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through the forrest bore her quite away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With briers and bushes all to-rent and scratcht;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne care he had, ne pittie of the pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which many a knight had sought so many a day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He stayed not, but in his armes her bearing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ran, till he came to th'end of all his way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto his cave farre from all peoples hearing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there he threw her in, nought feeling, ne nought fearing.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For she, deare Ladie, all the way was dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilest he in armes her bore; but, when she felt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her selfe downe soust, she waked out of dread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Streight into griefe, that her deare hart nigh swelt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eft gan into tender teares to melt.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, when she lookt about, and nothing found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But darknesse and dread horrour where she dwelt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She almost fell againe into a swound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne wist whether above she were or under ground.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that she heard some one close by her side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sighing and sobbing sore, as if the paine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her tender hart in peeces would divide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which she long listning, softly askt againe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What mister wight it was that so did plaine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom thus aunswer'd was: "Ah, wretched wight!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seekes to know anothers griefe in vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unweeting of thine owne like haplesse plight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Selfe to forget to mind another is over-sight."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Aye me!" (said she) "where am I, or with whom?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emong the living, or emong the dead?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What shall of me, unhappy maid, become?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall death be th'end, or ought else worse, aread?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Unhappy mayd" (then answer'd she) "whose dread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untride is lesse then when thou shalt it try:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Death is to him, that wretched life doth lead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both grace and gaine; but he in hell doth lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That lives a loathed life, and wishing cannot die.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"This dismall day hath thee a captive made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And vassall to the vilest wretch alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose cursed usage and ungodly trade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The heavens abhorre, and into darkenesse drive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For on the spoile of women he doth live,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose bodies chast, when ever in his powre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He may them catch unable to gainestrive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He with his shamefull lust doth first deflowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And afterwardes themselves doth cruelly devoure.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Now twenty daies, by which the sonnes of men</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Divide their works, have past through heven sheene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since I was brought into this dolefull den;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">During which space these sory eies have seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seaven women by him slaine, and eaten clene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now no more for him but I alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And this old woman, here remaining beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till thou cam'st hither to augment our mone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of us three to morrow he will sure eate one."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ah, dreadfull tidings which thou doest declare,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Quoth she) "of all that ever hath bene knowen!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full many great calamities and rare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This feeble brest endured hath, but none</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Equall to this, where ever I have gone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But what are you, whom like unlucky lot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath linckt with me in the same chaine attone?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"To tell" (quoth she) "that what ye see, needs not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wofull wretched maid, of God and man forgot!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But what I was it irkes me to reherse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Daughter unto a Lord of high degree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That joyd in happy peace, till fates perverse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With guilefull love did secretly agree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To overthrow my state and dignitie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It was my lot to love a gentle swaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was he but a Squire of low degree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was he meet, unless mine eye did faine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By any Ladies side for Leman to have laine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But for his meannesse and disparagement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Sire, who me too dearely well did love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto my choise by no meanes would assent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But often did my folly fowle reprove:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet nothing could my fixed mind remove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, whether willed or nilled friend or foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I me resolv'd the utmost end to prove;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, rather then my love abandon so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both sire and friends and all for ever to forgo.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Thenceforth I sought by secret meanes to worke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Time to my will, and from his wrathfull sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hide th'intent which in my heart did lurke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till I thereto had all things ready dight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So on a day, unweeting unto wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I with that Squire agreede away to flit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in a privy place, betwixt us hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within a grove appointed him to meete;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To which I boldly came upon my feeble feete.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But ah! unhappy houre me thither brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For in that place where I him thought to find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There was I found, contrary to my thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of this accursed Carle of hellish kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The shame of men, and plague of womankind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who trussing me, as Eagle doth his pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me hether brought with him as swift as wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where yet untouched till this present day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I rest his wretched thrall, the sad Aemylia."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ah, sad Aemylia!" (then sayd Amoret)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Thy ruefull plight I pitty as mine owne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But read to me, by what devise or wit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hast thou in all this time, from him unknowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thine honor sav'd, though into thraldome throwne?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Through helpe" (quoth she) "of this old woman here</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I have so done, as she to me hath showne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, ever when he burnt in lustfull fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She in my stead supplide his bestiall desire."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus of their evils as they did discourse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And each did other much bewaile and mone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Loe! where the villaine selfe, their sorrowes sourse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came to the cave; and rolling thence the stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which wont to stop the mouth thereof, that none</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might issue forth, came rudely rushing in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, spredding over all the flore alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan dight him selfe unto his wonted sinne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which ended, then his bloudy banket should beginne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when as fearefull Amoret perceived,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She staid not th'utmost end thereof to try,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, like a ghastly Gelt whose wits are reaved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ran forth in hast with hideous outcry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For horrour of his shamefull villany:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But after her full lightly he uprose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her pursu'd as fast as she did flie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full fast she flies, and farre afore him goes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne feeles the thornes and thickets pricke her tender toes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nor hedge, nor ditch, nor hill, nor dale she staies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But overleapes them all, like Robucke light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through the thickest makes her nighest waies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evermore, when with regardfull sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She looking backe espies that griesly wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Approching nigh, she gins to mend her pace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And makes her feare a spur to hast her flight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More swift then Myrrh' or Daphne in her race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or any of the Thracian Nimphes in salvage chase.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Long so she fled, and so he follow'd long;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne living aide for her on earth appeares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But-if the heavens helpe to redresse her wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Moved with pity of her plenteous teares.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It fortuned Belphebe with her peares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The woody Nimphs, and with that lovely boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was hunting then the Libbards and the Beares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In these wild woods, as was her wonted joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To banish sloth that oft doth noble mindes annoy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It so befell, as oft it fals in chace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That each of them from other sundred were;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that same gentle bquire arnv d in place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where this same cursed caytive did appeare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pursuing that faire Lady full of feare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now he her quite overtaken had;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now he her away with him did beare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under his arme, as seeming wondrous glad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That by his grenning laughter mote farre off be rad.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which drery sight the gentle Squire espying</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth hast to crosse him by the nearest way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Led with that wofull Ladies piteous crying,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him assailes with all the might he may;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet will not he the lovely spoile downe lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with his craggy club in his right hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Defends him selfe, and saves his gotten pray:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet had it bene right hard him to withstand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that he was full light and nimble on the land.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereto the villaine used craft in fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, ever when the Squire his javelin shooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He held the Lady forth before him right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with her body, as a buckler, broke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The puissance of his intended stroke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if it chaunst, (as needs it must in fight)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilest he on him was greedy to be wroke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That any little blow on her did light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then would he laugh aloud, and gather great delight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which subtill sleight did him encumber much,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made him oft, when he would strike, forbeare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For hardly could he come the carle to touch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that he her must hurt, or hazard neare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet he his hand so carefully did beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That at the last he did himselfe attaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therein left the pike-head of his speare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A streame of coleblacke bloud thence gusht amaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all her silken garments did with bloud bestaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that he threw her rudely on the flore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, laying both his hands upon his glave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With dreadfull strokes let drive at him so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That forst him flie abacke, himselfe to save:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet he therewith so felly still did rave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That scarse the Squire his hand could once upreare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But for advantage ground unto him gave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tracing and traversing, now here, now there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For bootlesse thing it was to think such blowes to beare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whilest thus in battell they embusied were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Belphebe, raunging in that forrest wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hideous noise of their huge strokes did heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And drew thereto, making her eare her guide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when that theefe approching nigh espide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With bow in hand and arrowes ready bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He by his former combate would not bide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But fled away with ghastly dreriment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well knowing her to be his deaths sole instrument.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom seeing flie she speedily poursewed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With winged feete as nimble as the winde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever in her bow she ready shewed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The arrow to his deadly marke desynde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As when Latonaes daughter, cruell kynde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In vengement of her mothers great disgrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With fell despight her cruell arrowes tynde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst wofull Niobes unhappy race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all the gods did mone her miserable case.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So well she sped her, and so far she ventred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, ere unto his hellish den he raught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as he ready was there to have entred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She sent an arrow forth with mighty draught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in the very dore him overcaught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, in his nape arriving, through it thrild</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His greedy throte, therewith in two distraught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all his vitall spirites thereby spild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all his hairy brest with gory bloud was fild.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when on ground she groveling saw to rowle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She ran in hast his life to have bereft;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, ere she could him reach, the sinfull sowle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having his carrion corse quite sencelesse left</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was fled to hell, surcharg'd with spoile and theft:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet over him she there long gazing stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oft admir'd his monstrous shape, and oft</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mighty limbs, whilest all with filthy bloud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The place there overflowne seemd like a sodaine flood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thence forth she past into his dreadfull den,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where nought but darkesome drerinesse she found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne creature saw, but hearkned now and then</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some litle whispering, and soft groning sound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that she askt, what ghosts there under ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lay hid in horrour of eternall night?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bad them, if so be they were not bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To come and shew themselves before the light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now freed from feare and danger of that dismall wight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then forth the sad Aemylia issewed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet trembling every joynt through former feare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after her the Hag, there with her mewed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A foule and lothsome creature, did appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A leman fit for such a lover deare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That mov'd Belphebe her no lesse to hate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then for to rue the others heavy cheare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whom she gan enquire of her estate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who all to her at large, as hapned, did relate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thence she them brought toward the place where late</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She left the gentle Squire with Amoret:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There she him found by that new lovely mate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who lay the whiles in swoune, full sadly set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From her faire eyes wiping the deawy wet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which softly stild, and kissing them atweene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And handling soft the hurts which she did get;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For of that Carle she sorely bruz'd had beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Als of his owne rash hand one wound was to be scene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when she saw with sodaine glauncing eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her noble heart with sight thereof was fild</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With deepe disdaine and great indignity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in her wrath she thought them both have thrild</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that selfe arrow which the Carle had kild;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet held her wrathfull hand from vengeance sore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But drawing nigh, ere he her well beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Is this the faith?" she said and said no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But turnd her face, and fled away for evermore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He seeing her depart arose up light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right sore agrieved at her sharpe reproofe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And follow'd fast; but, when he came in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He durst not nigh approch, but kept aloofe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For dread of her displeasures utmost proofe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evermore, when he did grace entreat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And framed speaches fit for his behoofe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her mortall arrowes she at him did threat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And forst him backe with fowle dishonor to retreat.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last, when long he follow'd had in vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet found no ease of griefe nor hope of grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto those woods he turned backe againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of sad anguish and in heavy case:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, finding there fit solitary place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For wofull wight, chose out a gloomy glade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where hardly eye mote see bright heavens face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For mossy trees, which covered all with shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sad melancholy: there he his cabin made.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His wonted warlike weapons all he broke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And threw away, with vow to use no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne thenceforth ever strike in battell stroke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever word to speake to woman more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in that wildernesse, of men forlore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of the wicked world forgotten quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His hardjmishap in dolor to deplore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wast his wretched daies in wofull plight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So on him selfe to wreake his follies owne despight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And eke his garment, to be thereto meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He wilfully did cut and shape anew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his faire lockes, that wont with ointment sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be embaulm'd, and sweat out dainty dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He let to grow and griesly to concrew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uncomb'd, uncurl'd, and carelesly unshed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in short time his face they overgrew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And over all his shoulders did dispred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That who he whilome was uneath was to be red.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There he continued in this carefull plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wretchedly "wearing out his youthly yeares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through wilfull penury consumed quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That like a pined ghost he soone appeares:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For other food then that wilde forrest beares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne other drinke there did he ever tast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then running water tempred with his teares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The more his weakened body so to wast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That out of all: mens knowledge he was worne at last.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For on a day, by fortune as it fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His owne deare Lord Prince Arthure came that way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeking adventures where he mote heare tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, as he through the wandring wood did stray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having espide this Cabin far away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He to it drew, to weet who there did wonne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weening therein some holy Hermit lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That did resort of sinfull people shonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or else some woodman shrowded there from scorching sunne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Arriving there he found this wretched man</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spending his daies in dolour and despaire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through long fasting woxen pale and wan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All overgrowen with rude and rugged haire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That albeit his owne dear Squire he were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet he him knew not, ne aviz'd at all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But like strange wight, whom he had scene no where,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saluting him gan into speach to fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pitty much his plight, that liv'd like outcast thrall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But to his speach he aunswered no whit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But stood still mute, as if he had beene dum,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne signe of sence did shew, ne common wit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one with griefe and anguishe overcum,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto every thing did aunswere mum:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever, when the Prince unto him spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He louted lowly, as did him becum,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And humble homage did unto him make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Midst sorrow shewing joyous semblance for his sake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At which his uncouth guise and usage quaint</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Prince did wonder much, yet could not ghesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cause of that his sorrowfull constraint;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet weend, by secret signes of manlinesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which close appeard in that rude brutishnesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he whilome some gentle swaine had beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Traind up in feats of armes and knightlinesse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he observ'd, by that he him had scene</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To weld his naked sword, and try the edges keene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And eke by that he saw on every tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How he the name of one engraven had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which likly was his liefest love to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whom he now so sorely was bestad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which was by him <b>Belphebe</b> rightly rad.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet who was that Belphebe he ne wist;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet saw he often how he wexed glad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When he it heard, and how the ground he kist</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein it written was, and how himselfe he blist.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho, when he long had marked his demeanor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saw that all he said and did was vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought mote make him change his wonted tenor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought mote ease or mitigate his paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He left him there in langour to remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till time for him should remedy provide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him restore to former grace againe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, for it is too long here to abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will deferre the end untill another tide.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-8" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The gentle Squire recovers grace:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Sclaunder her guests doth staine:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Corflambo chaceth Placidas,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And is by Arthur slaine.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Well said the Wiseman, now prov'd true by this</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to this gentle Squire did happen late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the displeasure of the mighty is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then death it selfe more dread and desperate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For naught the same may calme ne mitigate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till time the tempest doe thereof delay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sufferaunce soft, which rigour can abate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And have the sterne remembrance wypt away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of bitter thoughts, which deepe therein infixed lay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like as it fell to this unhappy boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose tender heart the faire Belphebe had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With one sterne looke so daunted, that no joy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In all his life, which afterwards he lad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He ever tasted; but with penaunce sad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pensive sorrow pind and wore away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever laught, ne once shew'd countenance glad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But alwaies wept and wailed night and day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As blasted bloosme through heat doth languish and decay</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Till on a day, as in his wonted wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His doole he made, there chaunst a turtle Dove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To come where he his dolors did devise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That likewise late had lost her dearest love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which losse her made like passion also prove:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, seeing his sad plight, her tender heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With deare compassion deeply did emmove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she gan mone his undeserved smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with her dolefull accent beare with him a part.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Shee sitting by him, as on ground he lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her mournefull notes full piteously did frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thereof made a lamentable lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So sensibly compyld, that in the same</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him seemed oft he heard his owne right name.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that he forth would poure so plenteous teares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And beat his breast unworthy of such blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And knocke his head, and rend his rugged heares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That could have perst the hearts of Tigres and of Beares.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus, long this gentle bird to him did use</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withouten dread of perill to repaire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto his wonne, and with her mournefull muse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him to recomfort in his greatest care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That much did ease his mourning and misfare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every day, for guerdon of her song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He part of his small feast to her would share;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, at the last, of all his woe and wrong</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Companion she became, and so continued long.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Upon a day as she him sate beside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By chance he certaine miniments forth drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which yet with him as relickes did abide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the bounty which Belphebe threw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On him, whilst goodly grace she him did shew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst the rest a Jewell rich he found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was a Ruby of right perfect hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shap'd like a heart yet bleeding of the wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with a litle golden chaine about it bound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The same he tooke, and with a riband new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which his Ladies colours were, did bind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About the turtles necke, that with the vew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did greatly solace his engrieved mind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All unawares the bird, when she did find</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her selfe so deckt, her nimble wings displaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And flew away as lightly as the wind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which sodaine accident him much dismaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And looking after long did mark which way she straid.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when as long he looked had in vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet saw her forward still to make her flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His weary eie returnd to him againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of discomfort and disquiet plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That both his juell he had lost so light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke his deare companion of his care.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that sweet bird departing flew forthright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through the wide region of the wastfull aire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Untill she came where wonned his Belphebe faire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There found she her (as then it did betide)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sitting in covert shade of arbors sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After late wearie toile which she had tride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In salvage chase, to rest as seem'd her meet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There she alighting fell before her feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gan to her her mournfull plaint to make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As was her wont, thinking to let her weet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The great tormenting griefe that for her sake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her gentle Squire through her displeasure did pertake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She, her beholding with attentive eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At length did marke about her purple brest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That precious juell, which she formerly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had knowne right well, with colourd ribbands drest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith she rose in hast, and her addrest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With ready hand it to have reft away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the swift bird obayd not her behest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But swarv'd aside, and there againe did stay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She follow'd her, and thought againe it to assay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And ever, when she nigh approcht, the Dove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would flit a litle forward, and then stay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till she drew neare, and then againe remove;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So tempting her still to pursue the pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And still from her escaping soft away:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that at length into that forrest wide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She drew her far, and led with slow delay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In th'end she her unto that place did guide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereas that wofull man in langour did abide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones she flew unto his fearelesse hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there a piteous ditty new deviz'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if she would have made her understand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His sorrowes cause, to be of her despis'd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when she saw in wretched weedes disguiz'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With heary glib deform'd and meiger face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like ghost late risen from his grave agryz'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She knew him not, but pittied much his case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wisht it were in her to doe him any grace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He her beholding at her feet downe fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And kist the ground on which her sole did tread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And washt the same with water which did well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From his moist eies, and like two streames procead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet spake no word, whereby she might aread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What mister wight he was, or what he ment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, as one daunted with her presence dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Onely few ruefull lookes unto her sent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As messengers of his true meaning and intent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet nathemore his meaning she ared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wondred much at his so selcouth case;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by his persons secret seemlyhed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well weend that he had beene some man of place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before misfortune did his hew deface;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That being mov'd with ruth she thus bespake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ah! wofull man, what heavens hard disgrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or wrath of cruell wight on thee ywrake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or selfe-disliked life, doth thee thus wretched make?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"If heaven, then none may it redresse or blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith to his powre we all are subject borne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If wrathfull wight, then fowle rebuke and shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be theirs that have so cruell thee forlorne!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if through inward griefe or wilfull scorne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of life it be, then better doe advise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he, whose daies in wilfull woe are worne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The grace of his Creator doth despise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That will not use his gifts for thanklesse nigardise."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When so he heard her say, eftsoones he brake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His sodaine silence which he long had pent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, sighing inly deepe, her thus bespake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Then have they all themselves against me bent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For heaven, first author of my languish men t,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Envying my too great felicity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did closely with a cruell one consent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To cloud my daies in dolefull misery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make me loath this life, still longing for to die.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ne any but your selfe, O dearest dred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath done this wrong, to wreake on worthlesse wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your high displesure, through misdeeming bred:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, when your pleasure is to deeme aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye may redresse, and me restore to light!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which sory words her mightie hart did mate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With mild regard to see his ruefull plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her inhuming wrath she gan abate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And him receiv'd againe to former favours state.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In which he long time afterwards did lead</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An happie life with grace and good accord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fearlesse of fortunes chaunge or envies dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke all mindlesse of his owne deare Lord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The noble Prince, who never heard one word</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of ty dings what did unto him betide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or what good fortune did to him afford;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But through the endlesse world did wander wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him seeking evermore, yet no where him descride.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Till on a day, as through that wood he rode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He chaunst to come where those two Ladies late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Aemylia and Amoret, abode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both in full sad and sorrowfull estate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The one right feeble through the evill rate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of food which in her duresse she had found;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other almost dead and desperate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through her late hurts, and through that haplesse wound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With which the Squire, in her defence, her sore astound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when the Prince beheld, he gan to rew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The evill case in which those Ladies lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But most was moved at the piteous vew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Amoret, so neare unto decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her great daunger did him much dismay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones that pretious liqueur forth he drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he in store about him kept alway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with few drops thereof did softly dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her wounds, that unto strength restor'd her soone anew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho, when they both recovered were right well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan of them inquire, what evill guide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them thether brought, and how their harmes befell?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom they told all that did them betide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And how from thraldome vile they were untide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that same wicked Carle, by Virgins bond;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose bloudie corse they shew'd him there beside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke his cave in which they both were bond:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At which he wondred much when all those signes he fond.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And evermore he greatly did desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To know what Virgin did them thence unbind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oft of them did earnestly inquire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where was her won, and how he mote her find.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when as nought according to his mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He could out-learne, he them from ground did reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No service lothsome to a gentle kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on his warlike beast them both did beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Himselfe by them on foot to succour them from feare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So when that forrest they had passed well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A litle cotage farre away they spide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which they drew ere night upon them fell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And entring in found none therein abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But one old woman sitting there beside</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the ground in ragged rude attyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With filthy lockes about her scattered wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gnawing her nayles for felnesse and for yre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there out sucking venime to her parts entyre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A foule and loathly creature sure in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in conditions to be loath'd no lesse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she was stuft with rancour and despight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Up to the throat, that oft with bitternesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It forth would breake, and gush in great excesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pouring out streames of poyson and of gall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst all that truth or vertue doe professe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom she with leasings lewdly did miscall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wickedly backbite: Her name men Sclaunder call.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her nature is all goodnesse to abuse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And causelesse crimes continually to frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which she guiltlesse persons may accuse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And steale away the crowne of their good name:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever Knight so bold, ne ever Dame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So chast and loyall liv'd, but she would strive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With forged cause them falsely to defame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever thing so well was doen alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But she with blame would blot, and of due praise deprive.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her words were not, as common words are ment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T'expresse the meaning of the inward mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But noysome breath, and poysnous spirit sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From inward parts, with cancred malice lind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And breathed forth with blast of bitter wind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which passing through the eares would pierce the hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wound the soule it selfe with griefe unkind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, like the stings of aspes that kill with smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her spightfull words did pricke and wound the inner part.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such was that Hag, unmeet to host such guests,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom greatest Princes court would welcome fayne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But neede, that answers not to all requests,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bad them not looke for better entertayne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke that age despysed nicenesse vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enur'd to hardnesse and to homely fare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which them to warlike discipline did trayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And manly limbs endur'd with litle care</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against all hard mishaps and fortunelesse misfare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then all that evening (welcommed with cold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chearelesse hunger) they together spent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet found no fault, but that the Hag did scold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rayle at them with grudgefull discontent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For lodging there without her owne consent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet they endured all with patience milde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto rest themselves all onely lent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Regardlesse of that queane so base and vilde</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be unjustly blamd, and bitterly revilde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Here, well I weene, when as these rimes be red</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With misregard, that some rash-witted wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose looser thought will lightly be misled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These gentle Ladies will misdeeme too light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thus conversing with this noble Knight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith now of dayes such temperance is rare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hard to finde, that heat of youthfull spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ought will from his greedie pleasure spare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More hard for hungry steed t'abstaine from pleasant lare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But antique age, yet in the infancie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of time, did live then like an innocent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In simple truth and blamelesse chastitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne then of guile had made experiment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, void of vile and treacherous intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Held vertue for it selfe in soveraine awe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then loyall love had royall regiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And each unto his lust did make a lawe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From all forbidden things his liking to withdraw.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Lyon there did with the Lambe consort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the Dove sate by the Faulcons side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne each of other feared fraud or tort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But did in safe securitie abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withouten perill of the stronger pride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when the world woxe old, it woxe warre old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Whereof it hight) and, having shortly tride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The traines of wit, in wickednesse woxe bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dared of all sinnes the secrets to unfold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then beautie, which was made to represent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The great Creatours owne resemblance bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto abuse of lawlesse lust was lent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made the baite of bestiall delight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then faire grew foule, and foule grew faire in sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that, which wont to vanquish God and man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was made the vassall of the victors might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then did her glorious flowre wax dead and wan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Despisd and troden downe of all that over-ran.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now it is so utterly decayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That any bud thereof doth scarse remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But-if few plants, preserv'd through heavenly ayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Princes Court doe hap to sprout againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dew'd with her drops of bountie Soveraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which from that goodly glorious flowre proceed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sprung of the auncient stocke of Princes straine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now th'onely remnant of that royall breed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose noble kind at first was sure of heavenly seed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho, soone as day discovered heavens face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sinfull men with darknes overdight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This gentle crew gan from their eye-lids chace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The drowzie humour of the dampish night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did themselves unto their journey dight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So forth they yode, and forward softly paced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That them to view had bene an uncouth sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How all the way the Prince on footpace traced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Ladies both on horse, together fast embraced.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as they thence departed were afore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shamefull Hag, the slaunder of her sexe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them follow'd fast, and them reviled sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him calling theefe, them whores; that much did vexe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His noble hart: thereto she did annexe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">False crimes and facts, such as they never ment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That those two Ladies much asham'd did wexe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The more did she pursue her lewd intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rayl'd and rag'd, till she had all her poyson spent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last, when they were passed out of sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet she did not her spightfull speach forbeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But after them did barke, and still backbite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though there were none her hatefull words to heare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as a curre doth felly bite and teare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The stone which passed straunger at him threw:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So she, them seeing past the reach of eare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the stones and trees did rayle anew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till she had duld the sting which in her tongs end grew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They passing forth kept on their readie way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With easie steps so soft as foot could stryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both for great feeblesse, which did oft assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Amoret that scarcely she could ryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke through heavie armes which sore annoyd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Prince on foot, not wonted so to fare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose steadie hand was faine his steede to guyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the way from trotting hard to spare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So was his toyle the more, the more that was his care.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At length they spide where towards them with speed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Squire came gallopping, as he would flie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bearing a litle Dwarfe before his steed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the way full loud for aide did crie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seem'd his shrikes would rend the brasen skie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom after did a mightie man pursew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ryding upon a Dromedare on hie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of stature huge, and horrible of hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That would have maz'd a man his dreadfull face to vew</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For from his fearefull eyes two fierie beames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More sharpe then points of needles, did proceede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shooting forth farre away two flaming streames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of sad powre, that poysnous bale did breede</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To all that on him lookt without good heed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And secretly his enemies did slay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as the Basiliske, of serpents seede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From powrefull eyes close venim doth convay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the lookers hart, and killeth farre away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He all the way did rage at that same Squire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after him full many threatnings threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With curses vaine in his avengefull ire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But none of them (so fast away he flew)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him overtooke before he came in vew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where when he saw the Prince in armour bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He cald to him aloud his case to rew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rescue him, through succour of his might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From that his cruell foe that him pursewd in sight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones the Prince tooke downe those Ladies twaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From loftie steede, and mounting in their stead</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came to that Squire, yet trembling every vaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whom he gan enquire his cause of dread:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who as he gan the same to him aread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Loe! hard behind his backe his foe was prest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With dreadfull weapon aymed at his head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That unto death had doen him unredrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had not the noble Prince his readie stroke represt:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who, thrusting boldly twixt him and the blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The burden of the deadly brunt did beare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his shield, which lightly he did throw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over his head before the harme came neare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nathlesse it fell with so despiteous dreare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heavie sway, that hard unto his crowne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The shield it drove, and did the covering reare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith both Squire and dwarfe did tomble downe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the earth, and lay long while in senselesse swowne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whereat the Prince full wrath his strong right hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In full avengement heaved up on hie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stroke the Pagan with his steely brand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So sore, that to his saddle-bow thereby</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He bowed low, and so a while did lie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, sure, had not his massie yron mace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Betwixt him and his hurt bene happily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It would have cleft him to the girding place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, as it was, it did astonish him long space.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, when he to himselfe returnd againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All full of rage he gan to curse and sweare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And vow by Mahoune that he should be slaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that his murdrous mace he up did reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemed nought the souse thereof could beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therewith smote at him with all his might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, ere that it to him approched neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The royall child with readie quicke foresight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did shun the proofe thereof, and it avoyded light.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, ere his hand he could recure againe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To ward his bodie from the balefull stound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He smote at him with all his might and maine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So furiously that, ere he wist, he found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His head before him tombling on the ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles his babling tongue did yet blaspheme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And curse his God that did him so confound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles his life ran foorth in bloudie streame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His soule descended downe into the Stygian reame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when that Squire beheld, he woxe full glad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see his foe breath out his spright in vaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that same dwarfe right sorie seem'd and sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And howld aloud to see his Lord there slaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rent his haire and scratcht his face for paine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan the Prince at leasure to inquire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the accident there hapned plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And what he was whose eyes did flame with fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All which was thus to him declared by that Squire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"This mightie man," (quoth he) "whom you have slaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of an huge Geauntesse whylome was bred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by his strength rule to himselfe did gaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of many Nations into thraldome led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mightie kingdomes of his force adred;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom yet he conquer'd not by bloudie fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne hostes of men with banners brode dispred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by the powre of his infectious sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With which he killed all that came within his might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ne was he ever vanquished afore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But ever vanquisht all with whom he fought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne was there man so strong, but he downe bore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne woman yet so faire, but he her brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto his bay, and captived her thought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For most of strength and beautie his desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was spoyle to make, and wast them unto nought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By casting secret flakes of lustfull fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From his false eyes into their harts and parts entire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Therefore Corflambo was he cald aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though namelesse there his bodie now doth lie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet hath he left one daughter that is hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The faire Poeana, who seemes outwardly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So faire as ever yet saw living eie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And were her vertue like her beautie bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She were as faire as any under skie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But ah! she given is to vaine delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke too loose of life, and eke of love too light.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"So, as it fell, there was a gentle Squire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That lov'd a Ladie of high parentage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, for his meane degree might not aspire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To match so high, her friends with counsell sage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dissuaded her from such a disparage:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she, whose hart to love was wholly lent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of his hands could not redeeme her gage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, firmely following her first intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Resolv'd with him to wend, gainst all her friends consent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"So twixt themselves they pointed time and place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which when he according did repaire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An hard mishap and disaventrous case</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him chaunst: instead of his Aemylia faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This Gyants sonne, that lies there on the laire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An headlesse heape, him unawares there caught;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all dismayd through mercilesse despaire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him wretched thrall unto his dongeon brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where he remaines, of all unsuccour'd and unsought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"This Gyants daughter came upon a day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the prison, in her joyous glee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To view the thrals which there in bondage lay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst the rest she chaunced there to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This lovely swaine, the Squire of low degree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom she did her liking lightly cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wooed him her paramour to bee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From day to day she woo'd and prayd him fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for his love him promist libertie at last.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"He, though affide unto a former love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom his faith he firmely ment to hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet seeing not how thence he mote remove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by that meanes which fortune did unfold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her graunted love, but with affection cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To win her grace his libertie to get:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet she him still detaines in captive hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fearing, least if she should him freely set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would her shortly leave, and former love forget.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Yet so much favour she to him hath hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above the rest, that he sometimes may space</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And walke about her gardens of delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having a keeper still with him in place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which keeper is this Dwarfe, her dearling base,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom the keyes of every prison dore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By her committed be, of speciall grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at his will may whom he list restore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And whom he list reserve to be afflicted more.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Whereof when tydings came unto mine eare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full inly sorie, for the fervent zeale</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which I to him as to my soule did beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I thether went; where I did long conceale</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My selfe, till that the Dwarfe did me reveale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And told his Dame her Squire of low degree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did secretly out of her prison steale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For me he did mistake that Squire to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For never two so like did living creature see.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Then was I taken and before her brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, through the likenesse of my outward hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being likewise beguiled in her thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan blame me much for being so untrew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke by flight her fellowship t'eschew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That lov'd me deare, as dearest thing alive.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence she commaunded me to prison new.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof I glad did not gaine say nor strive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But suffred that same Dwarfe me to her dongeon drive.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"There did I finde mine onely faithfull frend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In heavy plight and sad perplexitie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof I sorie, yet myselfe did bend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him to recomfort with my companie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But him the more agreev'd I found thereby:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all his joy, he said, in that distresse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was mine and his Aemylias libertie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Aemylia well he lov'd, as I mote ghesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet greater love to me then her he did professe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But I with better reason him aviz'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shew'd him how, through error and misthought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of our like persons, eath to be disguiz'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or his exchange or freedom might be wrought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereto full loth was he, ne would for ought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Consent that I, who stood all fearelesse free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should wilfully be into thraldome brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till fortune did perforce it so decree:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, over-ruld at last, he did to me agree.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"The morrow next, about the wonted howre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Dwarfe cald at the doore of Amyas</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To come forthwith unto his Ladies bowre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Insteed of whom forth came I, Placidas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And undiscerned forth with him did pas.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There with great joyance and with gladsome glee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of faire Pceana I received was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oft imbrast, as if that I were hee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with kind words accoyd, vowing great love to mee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Which I, that was not bent to former love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As was my friend that had her lone refus'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did well accept, as well it did behove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the present neede it wisely usd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My former hardnesse first I faire excusd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after promist large amends to make.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With such smooth termes her error I abusd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To my friends good more then for mine owne sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For whose sole libertie I love and life did stake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Thenceforth I found more favour at her hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to her Dwarfe, which had me in his charge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She bad to lighten my too heavie band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And graunt more scope to me to walke at large.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So on a day, as by the flowrie marge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of a fresh streame I with that Elfe did play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Finding no meanes how I might us enlarge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if that Dwarfe I could with me convay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I lightly snatcht him up and with me bore away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Thereat he shriekt aloud, that with his cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Tyrant selfe came forth with yelling bray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And me pursew'd; but nathemore would I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forgoe the purchase of my gotten pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But have perforce him hether brought away."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus as they talked, loe! where nigh at hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those Ladies two, yet doubtfull through dismay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In presence came, desirous t'understand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tydings of all which there had hapned on the land.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Where soone as sad Aemylia did espie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her captive lovers friend, young Placidas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All mindlesse of her wonted modestie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She to him ran, and him with streight embras</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enfolding, said; "And lives yet Amyas?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"He lives," (quoth he) "and his Aemylia loves."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Then lesse," (said she) "by all the woe I pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which my weaker patience fortune proves:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But what mishap thus long him fro my selfe removes?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then gan he all this storie to renew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tell the course of his captivitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her deare hart full deepely made to rew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sigh full sore to heare the miserie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which so long he mercilesse did lie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, after many teares and sorrowes spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She deare besought the Prince of remedie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who thereto did with readie will consent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And well performed; as shall appeare by his event.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-9" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The Squire of low degree, releast,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Paeana takes to wife:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Britomart fightes with many Knights;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Prince Arthur stints their strife.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Hard is the doubt, and difficult to deeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When all three kinds of love together meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doe dispart the hart with powre extreme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether shall weigh the balance downe; to weet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The deare affection unto kindred sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or raging fire of love to womankind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or zeale of friends combynd with vertues meet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But of them all the band of vertuous mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me seemes, the gentle hart should most assured bind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For naturall affection soone doth cesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And quenched is with Cupids greater flame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But faithfull friendship doth them both suppresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And them with maystring discipline doth tame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through thoughts aspyring to eternall fame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For as the soule doth rule the earthly masse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the service of the bodie frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So love of soule doth love of bodie passe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No lesse then perfect gold surmounts the meanest brasse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All which who list by tryall to assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall in this storie find approved plaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which these Squires true friendship more did sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then either care of parents could refraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or love of fairest Ladie could constraine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For though Pceana were as faire as morne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet did this trustie squire with proud disdaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For his friends sake her offred favours scorne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she her selfe her syre of whom she was yborne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now, after that Prince Arthur graunted had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To yeeld strong succour to that gentle swayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who now long time had lyen in prison sad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan advise how best he mote darrayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That enterprize for greatest glories gayne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That headlesse tyrants tronke he reard from ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, having ympt the head to it agayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his usuall beast it firmely bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made it so to ride as it alive was found.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then did he take that chaced Squire, and layd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before the ryder, as he captive were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made his Dwarfe, though with unwilling ayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To guide the beast that did his maister beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till to his castle they approched neare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when the watch, that kept continuall ward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saw comming home, all voide of doubtfull feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He, running downe, the gate to him unbard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom straight the Prince ensuing in together far'd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There did he find in her delitious boure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The faire Poeana playing on a Rote</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Complayning of her cruell Paramoure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And singing all her sorrow to the note,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As she had learned readily by rote;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with the sweetnesse of her rare delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Prince halfe rapt began on her to dote;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till better him bethinking of the right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He her unwares attacht, and captive held by might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whence being forth produc'd, when she perceived</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her owne deare sire, she cald to him for aide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when of him no aunswere she received,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But saw him sencelesse by the Squire upstaide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She weened well that then she was betraide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan she loudly cry, and weepe, and waile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that same Squire of treason to upbraide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all in vaine: her plaints might not prevaile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne none there was to reskue her, ne none to baile.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then tooke he that same Dwarfe, and him compeld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To open unto him the prison dore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And forth to bring those thrals which there he held.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence forth were brought to him above a score</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Knights and Squires to him unknowne afore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which he did from bitter bondage free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto former liberty restore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst the rest that Squire of low degree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came forth full weake and wan, not like him selfe to bee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom soone as faire Aemylia beheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Placidas, they both unto him ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him embracing fast betwixt them held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Striving to comfort him all that they can,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And kissing oft his visage pale and wan:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That faire Poeana, them beholding both,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan both envy, and bitterly to ban;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through jealous passion weeping inly wroth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see the sight perforce that both her eyes were loth.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when awhile they had together beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And diversly conferred of their case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She, though full oft she both of them had scene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Asunder, yet not ever in one place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began to doubt, when she them saw embrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which was the captive Squire she lov'd so deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deceived through great likenesse of their face:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For they so like in person did appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she uneath discerned whether whether weare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And eke the Prince, when as he them avized,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their like resemblaunce much admired there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mazd how nature had so well disguized</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her worke, and counterfet her selfe so nere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if that by one patterne, scene somewhere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She had them made a paragone to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or whether it through skill or errour were.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus gazing long at them much wondred he;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So did the other Knights and Squires which them did see.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then gan they ransacke that same Castle strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which he found great store of hoorded threasure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which that tyrant gathered had by wrong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tortious powre, without respect or measure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon all which the Briton Prince made seasure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And afterwards continu'd there a while</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To rest him selfe, and solace in soft pleasure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those weaker Ladies after weary toile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To whom he did divide part of his purchast spoile.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, for more joy, that captive Lady faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The faire Pceana, he enlarged free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by the rest did set in sumptuous chaire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To feast and frollicke; nathemore would she</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shew gladsome countenaunce nor pleasaunt glee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But grieved was for losse both of her sire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke of Lordship with both land and fee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But most she touched was with griefe entire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For losse of her new love, the hope of her desire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But her the Prince, through his well wonted grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To better termes of myldnesse did entreat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From that fowle rudenesse which did her deface;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that same bitter corsive, which did eat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her tender heart and made refraine from meat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He with good thewes and speaches well applyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did mollifie, and calme her raging heat:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For though she were most faire, and goodly dyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet she it all did mar with cruelty and pride.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, for to shut up all in friendly love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith love was first the ground of all her griefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That trusty Squire he wisely well did move</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not to despise that dame which lov'd him liefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till he had made of her some better priefe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to accept her to his wedded wife:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereto he offred for to make him chiefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all her land and lordship during life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He yeelded, and her tooke; so stinted all their strife.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>From that day forth in peace and joyous blis</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They liv'd together long without debate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne private jarre, ne spite of enemis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could shake the safe assuraunce of their state:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And she, whom Nature did so faire create</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she mote match the fairest of her daies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet with lewd loves and lust intemperate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had it defaste, thenceforth reformd her waies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all men much admyrde her change, and spake her praise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus when the Prince had perfectly compylde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These paires of friends in peace and setled rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him selfe, whose minde did travell as with chylde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his old love conceav'd in secret brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Resolved to pursue his former quest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, taking leave of all, with him did beare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Amoret, whom Fortune by bequest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had left in his protection whileare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Exchanged out of one into another feare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Feare of her safety did her not constraine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For well she wist now in a mighty hond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her person, late in perm, did remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who able was all daungers to withstond:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But now in feare of shame she more did stond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeing her selfe all soly succourlesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Left in the victors powre, like vassall bond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose will her weakenesse could no way represse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In case his burning lust should breake into excesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But cause of feare, sure, had she none at all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of him, who goodly learned had of yore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The course of loose affection to forstall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lawlesse lust to rule with reasons lore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the while he by his side her bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She was as safe as in a Sanctuary.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus many miles they two together wore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke their loves dispersed diversly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet neither showed to other their hearts privity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At length they came whereas a troupe of Knights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They saw together skirmishing, as seemed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sixe they were all, all full of fell despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But foure of them the battell best beseemed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That which of them was best mote not be deemed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These foure were they from whom false Florimel</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By Braggadochio lately was redeemed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet, sterne Druon, and lewd Claribell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love-lavish Blandamour, and lustfull Paridell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Druons delight was all in single life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto Ladies love would lend no leasure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The more was Claribell enraged rife</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With fervent flames, and loved out of measure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So eke lov'd Blandamour, but yet at pleasure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would change his liking, and new Lemans prove;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Paridell of love did make no threasure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But lusted after all that him did move:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So diversly these foure disposed were to love.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But those two other, which beside them stoode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were Britomart and gentle Scudamour;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who all the while beheld their wrathfull moode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wondred at their impacable stoure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose like they never saw till that same houre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So dreadfull strokes each did at other drive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And laid on load with all their might and powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if that every dint the ghost would rive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of their wretched corses, and their lives deprive.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when Dan Aeolus, in great displeasure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For losse of his deare love by Neptune hent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sends forth the winds out of his hidden threasure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the sea to wreake his fell intent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They breaking forth with rude unruliment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From all foure parts of heaven doe rage full sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tosse the deepes, and teare the firmament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the world confound with wide uprore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if instead thereof they Chaos would restore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Cause of their discord and so fell debate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was for the love of that same snowy maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whome they had lost in Turneyment of late;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, seeking long to weet which way she straid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Met here together, where, through lewd upbraide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Ate and Duessa, they fell out;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And each one taking part in others aide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This cruell conflict raised thereabout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose dangerous successe depended yet in doubt:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For sometimes Paridell and Blandamour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The better had, and bet the others backe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones the others did the field recoure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on his foes did worke full cruell wracke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet neither would their fiendlike fury slacke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But evermore their malice did augment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that uneath they forced were, for lacke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of breath, their raging rigour to relent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rest themselves for to recover spirits spent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then gan they change their sides, and new parts take;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Paridell did take to Druons side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For old despight which now forth newly brake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst Blandamour, whom alwaies he envide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Blandamour to Claribell relide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So all afresh gan former fight renew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As when two Barkes, this caried with the tide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with the wind, contrary courses sew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If wind and tide doe change, their courses change anew</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thenceforth they much more furiously gan fare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if but then the battell had begonne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne helmets bright ne hawberks strong did spare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That through the clifts the vermeil bloud out sponne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all adowne their riven sides did ronne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such mortall malice wonder was to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In friends profest, and so great outrage donne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But sooth is said, and tride in each degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faint friends when they fall out most cruell fomen bee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus they long while continued in fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till Scudamour and that same Briton maide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By fortune in that place did chance to light:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom soone as they with wrathfull eie bewraide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They gan remember of the fowle upbraide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which that Britonesse had to them donne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In that late Turney for the snowy maide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where she had them both shamefully fordonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke the famous prize of beauty from them wonne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones all burning with a fresh desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of fell revenge, in their malicious mood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They from them selves gan turne their furious ire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cruell blades, yet steeming with whot bloud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against those two let drive, as they were wood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who wondring much at that so sodaine fit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet nought dismayd, them stoutly well withstood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne yeelded foote, ne once abacke did flit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But being doubly smitten likewise doubly smit.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The warlike Dame was on her part assaid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Claribell and Blandamour attone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Paridell and Druon fiercely laid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At Scudamour, both his professed fone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Foure charged two, and two surcharged one;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet did those two them selves so bravely beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That th'other litle gained by the lone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with their owne repayed duely weare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And usury withall: such gaine was gotten deare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Full oftentimes did Britomart assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To speake to them, and some emparlance move;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But they for nought their cruell hands would stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne lend an eare to ought that might behove.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As when an eager mastiffe once doth prove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The tast of bloud of some engored beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No words may rate, nor rigour him remove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From greedy hold of that his blouddy feast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So litle did they hearken to her sweet beheast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when the Briton Prince afarre beheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With ods of so unequall match opprest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mighty heart with indignation sweld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And inward grudge fild his heroicke brest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones him selfe he to their aide addrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thrusting fierce into the thickest preace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Divided them, how ever loth to rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And would them faine from battell to surceasse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With gentle words perswading them to friendly peace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But they so farre from peace or patience were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all at once at him gan fiercely flie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lay on load, as they him downe would beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to a storme which hovers under skie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long here and there and round about doth stie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At length breakes downe in raine, and haile, and sleet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First from one coast, till nought thereof be drie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then another, till that likewise fleet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so from side to side till all the world it weet.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But now their forces greatly were decayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Prince yet being fresh untoucht afore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who them with speaches milde gan first disswade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From such foule outrage, and them long forbore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till seeing them through suffrance hartned more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him selfe he bent their furies to abate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And layd at them so sharpely and so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shortly them compelled to retrate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And being brought in daunger to relent too late.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But now his courage being throughly fired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He ment to make them know their follies prise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had not those two him instantly desired</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T'asswage his wrath, and pardon their mesprise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At whose request he gan him selfe advise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To stay his hand, and of a truce to treat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In milder tearmes, as list them to devise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst which the cause of their so cruell heat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He did them aske, who all that passed gan repeat:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And told at large how that same errant Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet faire Britomart, them late had foyled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In open turney, and by wrongfull fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both of their publicke praise had them despoyled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And also of their private loves beguyled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of two full hard to read the harder theft:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she that wrongfull challenge soone assoyled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shew'd that she had not that Lady reft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(As they suppos'd) but her had to her liking left.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom the Prince thus goodly well replied:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Certes, sir Knight, ye seemen much to blame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To rip up wrong that battell once hath tried;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein the honor both of Armes ye shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the love of Ladies foule defame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom the world this franchise ever yeelded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of their loves choise they might freedom clame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in that right should by all knights be shielded:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gainst which, me seemes, this war ye wrongfully have wielded."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And yet" (quoth she) "a greater wrong remaines:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For I thereby my former love have lost;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom seeking ever since with endlesse paines</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath me much sorrow and much travell cost:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Aye me, to see that gentle maide so tost!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Scudamour, then sighing deepe, thus saide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Certes, her losse ought me to sorrow most,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose right she is, where ever she be straide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through many perils wonne, and many fortunes waide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"For from the first that her I love profest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto this houre, this present lucklesse howre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I never joyed happinesse nor rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But thus turmoild from one to other stowre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I wast my life, and doe my daies devowre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In wretched anguishe and incessant woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Passing the measure of my feeble powre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That living thus a wretch, and loving so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I neither can my love ne yet my life forgo."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then good Sir Claribell him thus bespake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Now were it not, sir Scudamour, to you</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dislikefull paine so sad a taske to take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mote we entreat you, sith this gentle crew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is now so well accorded all anew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That as we ride together on our way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye will recount to us in order dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All that adventure which ye did assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that faire Ladies love: past perils well apay."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So gan the rest him likewise to require,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Britomart did him importune hard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To take on him that paine: whose great desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He glad to satisfie, him selfe prepar'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tell through what misfortune he had far'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In that atchievement, as to him befell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all those daungers unto them declar'd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which sith they cannot in this Canto well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Comprised be, I will them in another tell.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-10" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Scudamore doth his request tell</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of vertuous Amoret:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Great Venus Temple is describ'd;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And Lovers life forth set.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>True he it said, what ever man it sayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That love with gall and hony doth abound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if the one be with the other wayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For every dram of hony therein found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A pound of gall doth over it redound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I too true by triall have approved;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For since the day that first with deadly wound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My heart was launcht, and learned to have loved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I never joyed howre, but still with care was moved.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And yet such grace is given them from above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the cares and evill which they meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May nought at all their setled mindes remove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But seeme, gainst common sence, to them most sweet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As hosting in their martyrdome unmeet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So all that ever yet I have endured</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I count as naught, and tread downe under feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since of my love at length I rest assured,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That to disloyalty she will not be allured.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Long were to tell the travell and long toile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through which this shield of love I late have wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And purchased this peerelesse beauties spoile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That harder may be ended, then begonne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But since ye so desire, your will be donne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then hearke, ye gentle knights and Ladies free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My hard mishaps that ye may learne to shonne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For though sweet love to conquer glorious bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet is the paine thereof much greater then the fee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"What time the fame of this renowmed prise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flew first abroad, and all mens eares possest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I, having armes then taken, gan avise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To winne me honour by some noble gest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And purchase me some place amongst the best.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I boldly thought, (so young mens thoughts are bold)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That this same brave emprize for me did rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that both shield and she whom I behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might be my lucky lot; sith all by lot we hold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"So on that hard adventure forth I went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the place of perill shortly came:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was a temple faire and auncient,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which of great mother Venus bare the name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And farre renowmed through exceeding fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much more then that which was in Paphos built,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that in Cyprus, both long since this same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though all the pillours of the one were guilt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the others pavement were with yvory spilt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And it was seated in an Island strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abounding all with delices most rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wall d by nature gainst invaders wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none mote have accesse, nor inward fare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by one way that passage did prepare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It was a bridge ybuilt in goodly wize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With curious Corbes and pendants graven faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, arched all with porches, did arize</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On stately pillours fram'd after the Doricke guize.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And for defence thereof on th 'other end</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There reared was a castle faire and strong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That warded all which in or out did wend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And flancked both the bridges sides along,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst all that would it faine to force or wrong:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therein wonned twenty valiant Knights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All twenty tride in warres experience long;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose office was against all manner wights</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By all meanes to maintaine that castels ancient rights.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Before that Castle was an open plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the midst thereof a piller placed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which this shield, of many sought in vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The shield of Love, whose guerdon me hath graced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was hangd on high with golden ribbands laced;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the marble stone was written this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With golden letters goodly well enchaced;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">
						<i>Blessed the man that well can use his blis:</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i>Whose ever be the shield, faire Amoret be his.</i>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Which when I red, my heart did inly earne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pant with hope of that adventures hap:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne stayed further newes thereof to learne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with my speare upon the shield did rap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the castle ringed with the clap.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Streight forth issewd a Knight all arm'd to proofe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bravely mounted to his most mishap:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, staying nought to question from aloofe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ran fierce at me that fire glaunst from his horses hoofe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Whom boldly I encountred (as I could)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by good fortune shortly him unseated.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones outsprung two more of equall mould;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But I them both with equall hap defeated.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So all the twenty I likewise entreated,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And left them groning there upon the plaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, preacing to the pillour, I repeated</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The read thereof for guerdon of my paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And taking downe the shield with me did it retaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"So forth without impediment I past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till to the Bridges utter gate I came;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which I found sure lockt and chained fast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I knockt, but no man aunswred me by name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I cald, but no man answred to my clame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet I persever'd still to knocke and call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till at the last I spide within the same</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where one stood peeping through a crevis small,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To whom I cald aloud, halfe angry therewithall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"That was to weet the Porter of the place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto whose trust the charge thereof was lent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His name was Doubt, that had a double face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th'one forward looking, th'other backeward bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therein resembling Janus auncient</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which hath in charge the ingate of the yeare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evermore his eyes about him went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if some proved perill he did feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or did misdoubt some ill whose cause did not appeare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"On th'one side he, on th'other sate Delay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behinde the gate that none her might espy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose manner was all passengers to stay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And entertaine with her occasions sly:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through which some lost great hope unheedily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which never they recover might againe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And others, quite excluded forth, did ly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long languishing there in unpittied paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seeking often entraunce afterwards in vaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Me when as he had privily espide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bearing the shield which I had conquerd late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He kend it streight, and to me opened wide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So in I past, and streight he closd the gate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But being in, Delay in close awaite</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Caught hold on me, and thought my steps to stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Feigning full many a fond excuse to prate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And time to steale, the threasure of mans day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose smallest minute lost no riches render may.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But by no meanes my way I would forslow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ought that ever she could doe or say;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But from my lofty steede dismounting low</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Past forth on foote, beholding all the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The goodly workes, and stones of rich assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cast into sundry shapes by wondrous skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That like on earth no where I recken may:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And underneath, the river rolling still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With murmure soft, that seem'd to serve the workmans will.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Thence forth I passed to the second gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Gate of Good Desert, whose goodly pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And costly frame were long here to relate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The same to all stoode alwaies open wide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in the Porch did evermore abide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An hideous Giant, dreadfull to behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That stopt the entraunce with his spacious stride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with the terrour of his countenance bold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full many did affray, that else faine enter would.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"His name was Daunger, dreaded over-all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who day and night did watch and duely ward</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From fearefull cowards entrance to forstall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And faint-heart-fooles, whom shew of perill hard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could terrific from Fortunes faire adward:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For oftentimes faint hearts, at first espiall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his grim face, were from approaching scard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unworthy they of grace, whom one deniall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Excludes from fairest hope withouten further triall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Yet many doughty warriours, often tride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In greater perils to be stout and bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Durst not the sternnesse of his looke abide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, soone as they his countenance did behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began to faint, and feele their corage cold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Againe, some other, that in hard assaies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were cowards knowne, and litle count did hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Either through gifts, or guile, or such like waies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crept in by stouping low, or stealing of the kaies.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But I, though meanest man of many moe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet much disdaining unto him to lout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or creepe betweene his legs, so in to goe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Resolv'd him to assault with manhood stout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And either beat him in, or drive him out.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones, advauncing that enchaunted shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all my might I gan to lay about:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when he saw, the glaive which he did wield</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He gan forthwith t'avale, and way unto me yield.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"So, as I entred, I did backeward looke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For feare of harme that might lie hidden there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And loe! his hindparts, whereof heed I tooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much more deformed fearefull, ugly were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then all his former parts did earst appere:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For hatred, murther, treason, and despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With many moe lay in ambushment there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Awayting to entrap the warelesse wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which did not them prevent with vigilant foresight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Thus having past all perill, I was come</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within the compasse of that Islands space;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which did seeme, unto my simple doome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The onely pleasant and delightfull place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ever troden was of footings trace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all that nature by her mother-wit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could frame in earth, and forme of substance base,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was there; and all that nature did omit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Art, playing second natures part, supplyed it.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"No tree, that is of count, in greenewood growes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From lowest Juniper to Ceder tall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No flowre in field, that daintie odour throwes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And deckes his branch with blossomes over all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But there was planted, or grew naturall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor sense of man so coy and curious nice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But there mote find to please it selfe withall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor hart could wish for any queint device,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But there it present was, and did fraile sense entice.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"In such luxurious plentie of all pleasure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It seem'd a second paradise to gheese,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So lavishly enricht with Natures threasure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That if the happie soules, which doe possesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th' Elysian fields and live in lasting blesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should happen this with living eye to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They soone would loath their lesser happinesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wish to life return'd againe to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in this joyous place they mote have joyance free.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Fresh shadowes, fit to shroud from sunny ray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire lawnds, to take the sunne in season dew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">bweet springs, in which a thousand JNymphs did play;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soft rombling brookes, that gentle slomber drew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">High reared mounts, the lands about to vew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Low looking dales, disloignd from common gaze;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Delightfull bowres, to solace lovers trew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">False Labyrinthes, fond runners eyes to daze;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All which by nature made did nature selfe amaze.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And all without were walkes and alley es dight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With divers trees enrang'd in even rankes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And here and there were pleasant arbors pight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shadie seates, and sundry flowring bankes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sit and rest the walkers wearie shankes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therein thousand payres of lovers walkt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Praysing their god, and yeelding him great thankes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever ought but of their true loves talkt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne ever for rebuke or blame of any balkt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"All these together by themselves did sport</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their spotlesse pleasures and sweet loves content.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, farre away from these, another sort</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of lovers lincked in true harts consent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which loved not as these for like intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But on chast vertue grounded their desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Farre from all fraud or fayned blandishment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, in their spirits kindling zealous fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brave thoughts and noble deedes did evermore aspire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Such were great Hercules and Hyllus deare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Trew Jonathan and David trustie tryde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stout Theseus and Pirithous his feare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Py lades and Orestes by his syde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Myld Titus and Gesippus without pryde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Damon and Pythias, whom death could not sever:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All these, and all that ever had bene tyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In bands of friendship, there did live for ever;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose lives although decay'd, yet loves decayed never.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Which when as I, that never tasted blis</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor happie howre, beheld with gazefull eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I thought there was none other heaven then this;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gan their endlesse happinesse envye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That being free from feare and gealosye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might frankely there their loves desire possesse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilest I, through paines and perlous jeopardie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was forst to seeke my lifes deare patronnesse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Much dearer be the things which come through hard distresse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Yet all those sights, and all that else I saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might not my steps withhold, but that forthright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto that purposd place I did me draw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where as my love was lodged day and night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The temple of great Venus, that is hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Queene of beautie, and of love the mother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There worshipped of every living wight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose goodly workmanship farre past all other</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ever were on earth, all were they set together.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Not that same famous Temple of Diane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose hight all Ephesus did oversee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And which all Asia sought with vowes prophane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One of the worlds seven wonders sayd to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might match with this by many a degree:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor that which that wise King of Jurie framed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With endlesse cost to be th'Almighties see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor all, that else through all the world is named</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To all the heathen Gods, might like to this be clamed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"I, much admyring that so goodly frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the porch approcht which open stood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But therein sate an amiable Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seem'd to be of very sober mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in her semblant shew'd great womanhood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strange was her tyre; for on her head a crowne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She wore, much like unto a Danisk hood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Poudred with pearle and stone; and all her gowne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enwoven was with gold, that raught full low adowne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"On either side of her two young men stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both strongly arm'd, as fearing one another;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet were they brethren both of halfe the blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Begotten by two fathers of one mother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though of contrarie natures each to other:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The one of them hight Love, the other Hate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hate was the elder, Love the younger brother;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was the younger stronger in his state</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then th'elder, and him maystred still in all debate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Nathlesse that Dame so well them tempred both,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she them forced hand to joyne in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Albe that Hatred was thereto full loth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And turn'd his face away, as he did stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unwilling to behold that lovely band.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet she was of such grace and vertuous might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her commaundment he could not withstand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But bit his lip for felonous despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gnasht his yron tuskes at that displeasing sight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Concord she cleeped was in common reed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mother of blessed Peace and Friendship trew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They both her twins, both borne of heavenly seed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And she her selfe likewise divinely grew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which right well her workes divine did shew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For strength and wealth and happinesse she lends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strife and warre and anger does subdew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of litle much, of foes she maketh friends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to afflicted minds sweet rest and quiet sends.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"By her the heaven is in his course contained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the world in state unmoved stands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As their Almightie maker first ordained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bound them with inviolable bands;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Else would the waters overflow the lands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fire devoure the ayre, and hell them quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that she holds them with her blessed hands.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She is the nourse of pleasure and delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And unto Venus grace the gate doth open right.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"By her I entring half dismayed was;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she in gentle wise me entertayned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And twixt her selfe and Love did let me pas;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Hatred would my entrance have restrayned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his club me threatned to have brayned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had not the Ladie with her powrefull speach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him from his wicked will uneath refrayned;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And th'other eke his malice did empeach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till I was throughly past the perill of his reach.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Into the inmost Temple thus I came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which fuming all with frankensence I found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And odours rising from the altars flame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon an hundred marble pillors round</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The roofe up high was reared from the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All deckt with crownes, and chaynes, and girlands gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thousand pretious gifts worth many a pound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which sad lovers for their vowes did pay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the ground was strow'd with flowres as fresh as May.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"An hundred Altars round about were set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All flaming with their sacrifices fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with the steme thereof the Temple swet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which rould in clouds to heaven did aspire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in them bore true lovers vowes entire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke an hundred brasen caudrons bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bath in joy and amorous desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Every of which was to a damzell hight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all the Priests were damzels in soft linnen dight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Right in the midst the Goddesse selfe did stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon an altar of some costly masse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose substance was uneath to understand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For neither pretious stone, nor durefull brasse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor shining gold, nor mouldring clay it was;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But much more rare and pretious to esteeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pure in aspect, and like to christall glasse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet glasse was not, if one did rightly deeme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, being faire and brickie, likest glasse did seeme.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But it in shape and beautie did excell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All other Idoles which the heathen adore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Farre passing that, which by surpassing skill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Phidias did make in Paphos Isle of yore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which that wretched Greeke, that life forlore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did fall in love: yet this much fairer shined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But covered with the slender veile afore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both her feete and legs together twyned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were with a snake, whose head and tail were fast combyned.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"The cause why she was covered with a vele</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was hard to know, for that her Priests the same</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From peoples knowledge labour'd to concele:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But sooth it was not sure for womanish shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor any blemish which the worke mote blame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But for, they say, she hath both kinds in one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both male and female, both under one name:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She syre and mother is her selfe alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Begets and eke conceives, ne needeth other none.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And all about her necke and shoulders flew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A flocke of litle loves, and sports, and joyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With nimble wings of gold and purple hew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose shapes seem'd not like to terrestriall boyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But like to Angels playing heavenly toyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whilest their eldest brother was away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cupid their eldest brother; he enjoyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wide kingdome of love with lordly sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to his law compels all creatures to obay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And all about her altar scattered lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great sorts of lovers piteously complayning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some of their losse, some of their loves delay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some of their pride, some paragons disdayning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some fearing fraud, some fraudulently fayning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As every one had cause of good or ill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst the rest some one, through Loves constrayning</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tormented sore, could not containe it still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thus brake forth, that all the temple it did fill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>" 'Great Venus! Queene of beautie and of grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The joy of Gods and men, that under skie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doest fayrest shine, and most adorne thy place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with thy smyling looke doest pacific</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The raging seas, and makst the stormes to flie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thee, goddesse, thee the winds, the clouds doe feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, when thou spredst thy mantle forth on hie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The waters play, and pleasant lands appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And heavens laugh, and al the world shews joyous cheare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>" 'Then doth the daedale earth throw forth to thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of her fruitful! lap aboundant flowres;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then all living wights, soone as they see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The spring breake forth out of his lusty bowres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They all doe learne to play the Paramours;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First doe the merry birds, thy prety pages,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Privily pricked with thy lustfull powres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Chirpe loud to thee out of their leavy cages,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thee their mother call to coole their kindly rages.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>" 'Then doe the salvage beasts begin to play</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their pleasant friskes, and loath their wonted food</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Lyons rore; the Tygres loudly bray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The raging Buls rebellow through the wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And breaking forth dare tempt the deepest flood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To come where thou doest draw them with desire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So all things else, that nourish vitall blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone as with fury thou doest them inspire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In generation seeke to quench their inward fire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>" 'So all the world by thee at first was made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dayly yet thou doest the same repayre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought on earth that merry is and glade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought on earth that lovely is and fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But thou the same for pleasure didst prepayre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou art the root of all that joyous is:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great God of men and women, queene of th'ayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mother of laughter, and welspring of blisse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O graunt that of my love at last I may not misse!'</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"So did he say: but I with murmure soft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none might heare the sorrow of my hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet inly gronmg deepe and sighing oft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besought her to graunt ease unto my smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to my wound her gratious help impart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilest thus I spake, behold! with happy eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I spyde where at the Idoles feet apart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A bevie of fayre damzels close did lye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wayting when as the Antheme should be sung on hye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"The first of them did seeme of ryper yeares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And graver countenance then all the rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet all the rest were eke her equall peares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet unto her obayed all the best.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her name was Womanhood; that she exprest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By her sad semblant and demeanure wyse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For stedfast still her eyes did fixed rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne rov'd at randon, after gazers guyse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose luring baytes oftimes doe heedlesse harts entyse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And next to her sate goodly Shamefastnesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever durst her eyes from ground upreare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever once did looke up from her desse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if some blame of evill she did feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in her cheekes made roses oft appeare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her against sweet Cherefulnesse was placed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose eyes, like twinkling stars in evening cleare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were deckt with smyles that all sad humors chaced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And darted forth delights the which her goodly graced.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And next to her sate sober Modestie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Holding her hand upon her gentle hart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her against sate comely Curtesie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That unto every person knew her part;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her before was seated overthwart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soft Silence, and submisse Obedience,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both linckt together never to dispart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both gifts of God, not gotten but from thence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both girlonds of his Saints against their foes offence.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Thus sate they all around in seemely rate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the midst of them a goodly mayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even in the lap of Womanhood there sate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which was all in lilly white aray'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With silver streames amongst the linnen stray'd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to the Morne, when first her shyning face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath to the gloomy world itselfe bewray'd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That same was fayrest Amoret in place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shyning with beauties light and heavenly vertues grace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Whom soone as I beheld, my hart gan throb</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Andvwade in doubt what best were to be donne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For sacrilege me seem'd the Church to rob,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And folly seem'd to leave the thing undonne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with so strong attempt I had begonne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, shaking off all doubt and shamefast feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Ladies love, I heard, had never wonne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst men of worth, I to her stepped neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by the lilly hand her labour'd up to reare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Thereat that formost matrone me did blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sharpe rebuke for being over bold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saying, it was to Knight unseemely shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a recluse Virgin to lay hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That unto Venus services was sold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom I thus: 'Nay, but it fitteth best</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Cupids man with Venus mayd to hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ill your goddesse services are drest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By virgins, and her sacrifices let to rest.'</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"With that my shield I forth to her did show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which all that while I closely had conceld;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which when Cupid, with his killing bow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cruell shafts, emblazond she beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At sight thereof she was with terror queld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said no more: but I, which all that while</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The pledge of faith, her hand, engaged held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like warie Hynd within the weedie soyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For no intreatie would forgoe so glorious spoyle.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And evermore upon the Goddesse face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mine eye was fixt, for feare of her offence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when I saw with amiable grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To laugh at me, and favour my pretence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I was emboldned with more confidence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And nought for nicenesse nor for envy sparing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In presence of them all forth led her thence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All looking on, and like astonisht staring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet to lay hand on her not one of all them daring.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"She often prayd, and often me besought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometime with tender teares to let her goe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometime with witching smyles; but yet, for nought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ever she to me could say or doe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could she her wished freedome fro me wooe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But forth I led her through the Temple gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which I hardly past with much adoe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that same Ladie, which me friended late</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In entrance, did me also friend in my retrate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"No lesse did Daunger threaten me with dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whenas he saw me, maugre all his powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That glorious spoyle of beautie with me lead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Cerberus, when Orpheus did recoure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His Leman from the Stygian Princes boure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But evermore my shield did me defend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the storme of every dreadfull stoure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus safely with my love I thence did wend."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So ended he his tale, where I this Canto end.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-11" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Marinells former wound is heald;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">He comes to Proteus hall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where Thamës doth the Medway wed</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And feasts the sea-gods all.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But ah for pittie! that I have thus long</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Left a fay re Ladie languishing in payne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now well-away! that I have doen such wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To let faire Florimell in bands remayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In bands of love, and in sad thraldomes chayne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From which, unlessesome heavenly powre her free</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By miracle, not yet appearing playne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She lenger yet is like captiv'd to bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That even to thinke thereof it inly pitties mee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Here neede you to remember, how erewhile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unlovely Proteus, missing to his mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Virgins love to win by wit or wile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her threw into a dongeon deepe and blind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there in chaynes her cruelly did bind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hope thereby her to his bent to draw:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, when as neither gifts nor graces kind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her constant mind could move at all he saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He thought her to compell by crueltie and awe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Deepe in the bottome of an huge great rocke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dongeon was, in which her bound he left,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That neither yron barres, nor brasen locke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did neede to gard from force, or secret theft</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all her lovers which would her have reft:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For wall'd it was with waves, which rag'd and ror'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As they the cliffe in peeces would have cleft;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besides ten thousand monsters foule abhor'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did waite about it, gaping griesly, all begor'd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And in the midst thereof did horror dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And darkenesse dredd that never viewed day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to the balefull house of lowest hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which old Styx her aged bones alway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Old Styx the Grandame of the Gods, doth lay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There did this lucklesse mayd seven months abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever evening saw, ne mornings ray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever from the day the night descride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thought it all one night that did no houres divide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And all this was for love of Marinell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who her despysd (ah! who would her despyse?)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wemens love did from his hart expell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all those joyes that weake mankind entyse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nathlesse his pride full dearely he did pryse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For of a womans hand it was ywroke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of the wound he yet in languor lyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne can be cured of that cruell stroke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which Britomart him gave, when he did her provoke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet farre and neare the Nymph his mother sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many salves did to his sore applie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many herbes did use. But when as nought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She saw, could ease his rankling maladie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last to Tryphon she for helpe did hie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(This Tryphon is the seagods surgeon hight,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom she besought to find some remedie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for his paines a whistle him behight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That of a fishes shell was wrought with rare delight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So well that Leach did hearke to her request,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did so well employ his carefull paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in short space his hurts he had redrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him restor'd to healthfull state againe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which he long time after did remaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There with the Nymph his mother, like her thrall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who sore against his will did him retaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For feare of perill which to him mote fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through his too ventrous prowesse proved over all.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It fortun'd then, a solemne feast was there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To all the Sea-gods and their fruitfull seede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In honour of the spousalls which then were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Betwixt the Medway and the Thames agreed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long had the Thames (as we in records reed)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before that day her wooed to his bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the proud Nymph would for no worldly meed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor no entreatie, to his love be led;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till now, at last relenting, she to him was wed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So both agreed that this their bridale feast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should for the Gods in Proteus house be made;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which they all repayr'd, both most and least,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As well which in the mightie Ocean trade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As that in rivers swim, or brookes doe wade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which, not if an hundred tongues to tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hundred mouthes, and voice of brasse I had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And endlesse memorie that mote excell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In order as they came could I recount them well.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Helpe, therefore, O! thou sacred imp of Jove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The noursling of Dame Memorie his deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom those rolles, layd up in heaven above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And records of antiquitie appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which no wit of man may comen neare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Helpe me to tell the names of all those floods</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all those Nymphes, which then assembled were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To that great banquet of the watry Gods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all their sundry kinds, and all their hid abodes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>First came great Neptune, with his threeforkt mace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That rules the Seas and makes them rise or fall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His dewy lockes did drop with brine apace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under his Diademe imperiall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by his side his Queene with coronall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Amphitrite, most divinely faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose yvorie shoulders weren covered all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As with a robe, with her owne silver haire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And deckt with pearles which th' Indian seas for her prepaire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>These marched farre afore the other crew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the way before them, as they went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Triton his trompet shrill before them blew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For goodly triumph and great jollyment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That made the rockes to roare as they were rent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after them the royall issue came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which of them sprung by lineall descent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First the Sea-gods, which to themselves doe clame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The powre to rule the billowes, and the waves to tame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Phorcys, the father of that fatall brood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By whom those old Heroes wonne such fame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Glaucus, that wise southsayes understood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tragicke Inoes sonne, the which became</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A God of seas through his mad mothers blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now hight Palemon, and is saylers frend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great Brontes; and Astrasus, that did shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himselfe with incest of his kin unkend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And huge Orion, that doth tempests still portend;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The rich Cteatus; and Eurytus long;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Neleus and Pelias, lovely brethren both;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mightie Chrysaor; and Caicus strong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eurypulus, that calmes the waters wroth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And faire Euphoemus, that upon them goth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As on the ground, without dismay or dread;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fierce Eryx; and Alebius, that know'th</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The waters depth, and doth their bottome tread;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sad Asopus, comely with his hoarie head.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There also some most famous founders were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of puissant Nations which the world possest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet sonnes of Neptune, now assembled here:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ancient Ogyges, even th'auncientest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Inachus renowmd above the rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Phoenix, and Aon, and Pelasgus old;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great Belus, Phoeax, and Agenor best;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mightie Albion, father of the bold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And warlike people which the Britaine Islands hold:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For Albion the sonne of Neptune was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, for the proofe of his great puissance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of his Albion did on dry-foot pas</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into old Gall, that now is cleeped France,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To fight with Hercules, that did advance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To vanquish all the world with matchlesse might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there his mortall part by great mischance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was slaine; but that which is th'immortall spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lives still, and to this feast with Neptunes seed was dight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But what doe I their names seeke to reherse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which all the world have with their issue fild?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How can they all in this so narrow verse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Contayned be, and in small compasse hild?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let them record them that are better skild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And know the moniments of passed age:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Onely what needeth shall be here fulfild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T'expresse some part of that great equipage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which from great Neptune do derive their parentage.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Next came the aged Ocean and his Dame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Old Tethys, th'oldest two of all the rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all the rest of those two parents came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which afterward both sea and land possest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all which Nereus, th'eldest and the best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did first proceed, then which none more upright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne more sincere in word and deed profest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most voide of guile, most free from fowle despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doing him selfe, and teaching others to doe right.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereto he was expert in prophecies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And could the ledden of the gods unfold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through which, when Paris brought his famous prise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The faire Tindarid lasse, he him fortold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her all Greece with many a champion bold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should fetch againe, and finally destroy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proud Priams towne. So wise is Nereus old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so well skild; nathlesse he takes great joy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oft-times amongst the wanton Nymphs to sport and toy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And after him the famous rivers came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which doe the earth enrich and beautifie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fertile Nile, which creatures new doth frame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long Rhodanus, whose sourse springs from the skie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Ister, flowing from the mountaines hie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Divine Scamander, purpled yet with blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Greeks and Trojans which therein did die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pactolus glistring with his golden flood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Tygris fierce, whose streames of none may be withstood;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Great Ganges, and immortall Euphrates,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deepe Indus, and Maeander intricate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Slow Peneus, and tempestuous Phasides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Swift Rhene, and Alpheus still immaculate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ooraxes, feared for great Cyrus fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tybris, renowmed for the Romaines fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rich Oranochy, though but knowen late;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that huge River, which doth beare his name</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of warlike Amazons, who doe possesse the same.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Joy on those warlike women, which so long</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can from all men so rich a kingdome hold!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shame on you, O men! which boast your strong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And valiant hearts, in thoughts lesse hard and bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet quaile in conquest of that land of gold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But this to you, O Britons! most pertaines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom the right hereof it selfe hath sold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which, for sparing litle cost or paines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loose so immortall glory, and so endlesse gaines.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then was there heard a most celestiall sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of dainty musicke, which did next ensew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before the spouse: that was Arion crownd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, playing on his harpe, unto him drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The eares and hearts of all that goodly crew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That even yet the Dolphin, which him bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through the Agaean seas from Pirates vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stood still by him astonisht at his lore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the raging seas for joy forgot to rore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So went he playing on the watery plaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone after whom the lovely Bridegroome came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The noble Thamis, with all his goodly traine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But him before there went, as best became,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His auncient parents, namely th'auncient Thame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But much more aged was his wife then he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Ouze, whom men doe Isis rightly name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full weake and crooked creature seemed shee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And almost blind through eld, that scarce her way could see.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therefore on either side she was sustained</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of two smal grooms, which by their names were hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Churne and Charwell, two small streames, which pained</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them selves her footing to direcl: aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which fayled oft through faint and feeble plight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Thame was stronger, and of better stay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet seem'd full aged by his outward sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With head all hoary, and his beard all gray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deawed with silver drops that trickled downe alway.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And eke he somewhat seem'd to stoupe afore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With bowed backe, by reason of the lode</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And auncient heavy burden which he bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that faire City, wherein make abode</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So many learned impes, that shoote abrode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with their braunches spred all Britany,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No lesse then do her elder sisters broode.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Joy to you both, ye double noursery</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Arts! but, Oxford, thine doth Thame most glorify.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But he their sonne full fresh and jolly was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All decked in a robe of watchet hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which the waves, glittering like Christall glas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So cunningly enwoven were, that few</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could weenen whether they were false or trew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on his head like to a Coronet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He wore, that seemed strange to common vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which were many towres and castels set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it encompast round as with a golden fret.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like as the mother of the Gods, they say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In her great iron charet wonts to ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When to Joves pallace she doth take her way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Old Cybele, arayd with pompous pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wearing a Diademe embattild wide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hundred turrets, like a Turribant;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With such an one was Thamis beautifide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was to weet the famous Troynovant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which her kingdomes throne is chiefly resiant.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And round about him many a pretty Page</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Attended duely, ready to obay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All little Rivers which owe vassallage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To him, as to their Lord, and tribute pay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The chaulky Kenet, and the Thetis gray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The morish Cole, and the soft sliding Breane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wanton Lee, that oft doth loose his way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the still Darent, in whose waters cleane</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ten thousand fishes play and decke his pleasant streame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then came his neighbour flouds which nigh him dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And water all the English soile throughout:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They all on him this day attended well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with meet service waited him about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne none disdained low to him to lout:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No, not the stately Severne grudg'd at all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne storming Humber, though he looked stout;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But both him honor'd as their principall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let their swelling waters low before him fall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There was the speedy Tamar, which devides</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Cornish and the Devonish confines;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through both whose borders swiftly downe it glides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, meeting Plim, to Plimmouth thence declines:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Dart, nigh chockt with sands of tinny mines.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Avon marched in more stately path,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proud of his Adamants with which he shines</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And glisters wide, as als' of wondrous Bath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Bristow faire, which on his waves he builded hath.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And there came Stoure with terrible aspect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bearing his sixe deformed heads on hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That doth his course through Blandford plains direct,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And washeth Winborne meades in season drye.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Next him went Wylibourne with passage slye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of his wylinesse his name doth take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of him selfe doth name the shire thereby:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Mole, that like a nousling Mole doth make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His way still under ground, till Thamis he overtake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then came the Rother, decked all with woods</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like a wood God, and flowing fast to Rhy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Sture, that parteth with his pleasant floods</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Easterne Saxons from the Southerne ny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Clare and Harwitch both doth beautify:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him follow'd Yar, soft washing Norwitch wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with him brought a present joyfully</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his owne fish unto their festivall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose like none else could shew, the which they Ruffins call,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Next these the plenteous Ouse came far from land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By many a city and by many a towne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many rivers taking under-hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into his waters as he passeth downe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Cle, the Were, the Grant, the Sture, the Rowne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence doth by Huntingdon and Cambridge flit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My mother Cambridge, whom as with a Crowne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He doth adorne, and is adorn'd of it</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With many a gentle Muse and many a learned wit.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And after him the fatall Welland went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, if old sawes prove true (which God forbid!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall drowne all Holland with his excrement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shall see Stamford, though now homely hid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then shine in learning, more than ever did</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cambridge or Oxford, Englands goodly beames.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And next to him the Nene downe softly slid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bounteous Trent, that in him selfe enseames</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both thirty sorts of fish, and thirty sundry streames.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Next these came Tyne, along whose stony bancke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Romaine Monarch built a brasen wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which mote the feebled Britons strongly flancke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the Pidts that swarmed over-all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which yet thereof Gualsever they doe call:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Twede, the limit betwixt Logris land</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Albany: And Eden, though but small,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet often stainde with bloud of many a band</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Scots ancl English both, that tyned on his strand.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then came those sixe sad brethren, like forlorne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That whilome were (as antique fathers tell)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sixe valiant Knights of one faire Nymphe yborne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which did in noble deedes of armes excell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wonned there where now Yorke people dwell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still Ure, swift Werfe, and Oze the most of might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">High Swale, unquiet Nide, and troublous Skell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All whom a Scythian king, that Humber hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slew cruelly, and in the river drowned quight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But past not long ere Brutus warlicke sonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Locrinus, them aveng'd, and the same date,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which the proud Humber unto them had donne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By equall dome repayd on his owne pate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For in the selfe same river, where he late</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had drenched them, he drowned him againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And nam'd the river of his wretched fate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose bad condition yet it doth retaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oft tossed with his stormes which therein still remaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>These after came the stony shallow Lone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to old Loncaster his name doth lend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And following Dee, which Britons long ygone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did call divine, that doth by Chester tend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Conway, which out of his streame doth send</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Plenty of pearles to decke his dames withall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Lindus that his pikes doth most commend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which the auncient Lincolne men doe call:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All these together marched toward Proteus hall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne thence the Irishe Rivers absent were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith no lesse famous then the rest they bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And joyne in neighbourhood of kingdome nere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why should they not likewise in love agree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And joy likewise this solemne day to see?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They saw it all, and present were in place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though I them all according their degree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cannot recount, nor tell their hidden race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor read the salvage cuntreis thorough which they pace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There was the Liffy rolling downe the lea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sandy Slane, the stony Aubrian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The spacious Shenan spreading like a sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The pleasant Boyne, the fishy fruitfull Ban,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Swift Awniduff, which of the English man</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is cal'de Blacke-water, and the Liffar deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sad Trowis, that once his people over-ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strong Allo tombling from Slewlogher steep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Mulla mine, whose waves I whilom taught to weep.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And there the three renowmed brethren were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which that great Gyant Blomius begot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the faire Nimph Rheusa wandring there.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One day, as she to shunne the season whot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under Slewboome in shady grove was got,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This Gyant found her and by force deflowr'd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof conceiving, she in time forth brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These three faire sons, which being thenceforth powrd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In three great rivers ran, and many countreis scowrd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The first the gentle Shure that, making way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By sweet Clonmell, adornes rich Waterford;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The next, the stubborne Newre whose waters gray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By faire Kilkenny and Rosseponte boord;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The third, the goodly Barow which doth hoord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great heapes of salmons in his deepe bosome:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which, long sundred, doe at last accord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To joyne in one, ere to the sea they come;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, flowing all from one, all one at last become.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There also was the wide embayed Mayre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The pleasaunt Bandon crownd with many a wood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The spreading Lee that, like an Island fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Encloseth Corke with his devided flood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And balefull Oure, late staind with English blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With many more whose names no tongue can tell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which that day in order seemly good</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did on the Thamis attend, and waited well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To doe their dueful service, as to them befell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then came the Bride, the lovely Medua came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Clad in a vesture of unknowen geare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And uncouth fashion, yet her well became,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seem'd like silver, sprinckled here and theare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With glittering spangs that did like starres appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wav'd upon, like water Chamelot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hide the metall, which yet every where</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bewrayd it selfe, to let men plainely wot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was no mortall worke, that seem'd and yet was not.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her goodly lockes adowne her backe did flow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto her waste, with flowres bescattered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which ambrosiall odours forth did throw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To all about, and all her shoulders spred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As a new spring; and likewise on her hed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Chapelet of sundry flowers she wore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From under which the deawy humour shed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did tricle downe her haire, like to the hore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Congealed litle drops which doe the morne adore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>On her two pretty handmaides did attend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One cald the Theise, the other cald the Crane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which on her waited things amisse to mend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both behind upheld her spredding traine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under the which her feet appeared plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her silver feet, faire washt against this day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her before there paced Pages twaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both clad in colours like, and like array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Doune and eke the Frith, both which prepard her way.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And after these the Sea Nymphs marched all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All goodly damzels, deckt with long greene haire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom of their sire Nereides men call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which the Oceans daughter to him bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gray-eyde Doris; all which fifty are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which she there on her attending had:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Swift Proto, milde Eucrate, Thetis faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soft Spio, sweete Endore, Sao sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Light Doto, wanton Glauce, and Galene glad;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>White hand Eunica, proud Dynamene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Joyous Thalia, goodly Amphitrite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lovely Pasithee, kinde Eulimene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lightfoote Cymothoe, and sweete Melite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fairest Pherusa, Phao lilly white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wondred Agave, Poris, and Nesaea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Erato that doth in love delite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Panopae, and wise Protomedaea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And snowy neckd Doris, and milkewhite Galathaea;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Speedy Hippothoe, and chaste Adtea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Large Lisianassa, and Pronaea sage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Euagore, and light Pontoporea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And she that with her least word can asswage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The surging seas, when they do sorest rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cymodoce, and stout Autonoe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Neso, and Eione well in age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, seeming still to smile, Glauconome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she that hight of many heastes Polynome;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Fresh Alimeda deckt with girlond greene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hyponeo with salt-bedewed wrests;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Laomedia like the christall sheene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Liagore much praisd for wise behests;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Psamathe for her brode snowy brests;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cymo, Eupompe, and Themiste just;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, she that vertue loves and vice detests,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Euarna, and Menippe true in trust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Nemertea learned well to rule her lust.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All these the daughters of old Nereus were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which have the sea in charge to them assinde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To rule his tides, and surges to uprere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bring forth stormes, or fast them to upbinde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sailers save from wreckes of wrathfull winde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet, besides, three thousand more there were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of th'Oceans seede, but Joves and Phoebus kinde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which in floods and fountaines doe appere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all mankinde do nourish with their waters clere.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The which, more eath it were for mortall wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tell the sands, or count the starres on hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ought more hard, then thinke to reckon right.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But well I wote that these, which I descry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were present at this great solemnity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there, amongst the rest, the mother was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of luckelesse Marinell, Cymodoce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, for my Muse her selfe now tyred has,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto an other Canto I will overpas.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-12" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Marin, for love of Florimell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In langour wastes his life;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Nymph, his mother getteth her</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And gives to him for wife.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>O! what an endlesse worke have I in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To count the seas abundant progeny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose fruitfull seede farre passeth those in land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And also those which wonne in th'azure sky:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For much more eath to tell the starres on hy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Albe they endlesse seeme in estimation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then to recount the Seas posterity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So fertile be the flouds in generation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So huge their numbers, and so numberlesse their nation.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therefore the antique wisards well invented</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Venus of the fomy sea was bred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that the seas by her are most augmented:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Witnesse th'exceeding fry which there are fed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wondrous sholes which may of none be red.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, blame me not if I have err'd in count</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Gods, of Nymphs, of rivers, yet unred;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For though their numbers do much more surmount,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet all those same were there which erst I did recount.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All those were there, and many other more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose names and nations were too long to tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Proteus house they fild even to the dore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet were they all in order, as befell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">According their degrees disposed well.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst the rest was faire Cymodoce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The mother of unlucky Marinell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who thither with her came, to learne and see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The manner of the Gods when they at banquet be.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But for he was halfe mortall, being bred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of mortall sire, though of immortall wombe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He might not with immortall food be fed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne with th'eternall Gods to bancket come;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But walkt abrode, and round about did rome</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To view the building of that uncouth place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seem'd unlike unto his earthly home:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where, as he to and fro by chaunce did trace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There unto him betid a disaventrous case.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Under the hanging of an hideous clieffe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He heard the lamentable voice of one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That piteously complaind her carefull grieffe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which never she before disclosd to none,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to her selfe her sorrow did bemone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So feelingly her case she did complaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ruth it moved in the rocky stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made it seeme to feele her grievous paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And oft to grone with billowes beating from the maine</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Though vaine, I see, my sorrowes to unfold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And count my cares when none is nigh to heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, hoping griefe may lessen being told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I will them tell though unto no man neare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For heaven, that unto all lends equall eare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is farre from hearing of my heavy plight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lowest hell, to which I lie most neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cares not what evils hap to wretched wight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And greedy seas doe in the spoile of life delight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Yet loe! the seas, I see, by often beating</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe pearce the rockes, and hardest marble weares;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But his hard rocky hart for no entreating</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will yeeld, but when my piteous plaints he heares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is hardned more with my aboundant teares:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet though he never list to me relent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But let me waste in woe my wretched yeares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet will I never of my love repent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But joy that for his sake I suffer prisonment.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And when my weary ghost, with griefe outworne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By timely death shall winne her wished rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let then this plaint unto his eares be borne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That blame it is to him, that armes profest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To let her die whom he might have redrest."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There did she pause, inforced to give place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the passion that her heart opprest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, after she had wept and wail'd a space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She gan afresh thus to renew her wretched case.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ye Gods of seas, if any Gods at all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have care of right, or ruth of wretches wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By one or other way me, woefull thrall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deliver hence out of this dungeon strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which I daily dying am too long:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if ye deeme me death for loving one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That loves not me, then doe it not prolong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But let me die and end my dales attone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let him live unlov'd, or love him selfe alone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But if that life ye unto me decree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then let mee live as lovers ought to do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of my lifes deare love beloved be:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if he should through pride your doome undo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do you by duresse him compell thereto,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in this prison put him here with me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One prison fittest is to hold us two.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So had I rather to be thrall then free;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such thraldome or such freedome let it surely be.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But O vaine judgement, and conditions vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which the prisoner points unto the free!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles I him condemne, and deeme his paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He where he list goes loose, and laughes at me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So ever loose, so ever happy be!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But where so loose or happy that thou art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Know, Marinell, that all this is for thee."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that she wept and wail'd, as if her hart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would quite have burst through great abundance of her smart.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All which complaint when Marinell had heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And understood the cause of all her care</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To come of him for using her so hard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His stubborne heart, that never felt misfare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was toucht with soft remorse and pitty rare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That even for griefe of minde he oft did grone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And inly wish that in his powre it weare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her to redresse: but since he meanes found none,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He could no more but her great misery bemone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus whilst his stony heart with tender ruth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was toucht, and mighty courage mollifide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dame Venus sonne, that tameth stubborne youth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With iron bit, and maketh him abide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till like a victor on his backe he ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into his mouth his maystring bridle threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That made him stoupe, till he did him bestride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan he make him tread his steps anew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And learne to love by learning lovers paines to rew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now gan he in his grieved minde devise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How from that dungeon he might her enlarge.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some while he thought, by faire and humble wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Proteus selfe to sue for her discharge:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But then he fear'd his mothers former charge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst womens love, long given him in vaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan he thinke, perforce with sword and targe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her forth to fetch, and Proteus to constraine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But soone he gan such folly to forthinke againe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then did he cast to steale her thence away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with him beare where none of her might know:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all in vaine, for-why he found no way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To enter in, or issue forth below;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all about that rocke the sea did flow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And though unto his will she given were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet without ship or bote her thence to row,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He wist not how her thence away to bere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And daunger well he wist long to continue there.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As last, when as no meanes he could invent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Backe to him selfe he gan returne the blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was the author of her punishment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with vile curses and reprochfull shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To damne him selfe by every evil name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And deeme unworthy or of love or life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That had despisde so chast and faire a dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which him had sought through trouble and long strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet had refusde a God that her had sought to wife.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In this sad plight he walked here and there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And romed round about the rocke in vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he had lost him selfe he wist not where;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oft listening if he mote her heare againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And still bemoning her unworthy paine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as an Hynde, whose calfe is falne unwares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into some pit, where she him heares complaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An hundred times about the pit side fares</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right sorrowfully mourning her bereaved cares.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now by this the feast was throughly ended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every one gan homeward to resort:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which seeing, Marinell was sore offended</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That his departure thence should be so short,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And leave his love in that sea-walled fort.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet durst he not his mother disobay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But her attending in full seemly sort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did march amongst the many all the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the way did inly mourne, like one astray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Being returned to his mothers bowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In solitary silence, far from wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan record the lamentable stowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which his wretched love lay day and night</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For his deare sake, that ill deserv'd that plight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The thought whereof empierst his hart so deepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of no worldly thing he tooke delight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne dayly food did take, ne nightly sleepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But pyn'd, and mourn'd, and languisht, and alone did weepe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That in short space his wonted chearefull hew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan fade, and lively spirits deaded quight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His cheeke-bones raw, and eie-pits hollow grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And brawney armes had lost their knowen might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nothing like himselfe he seem'd in sight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere long so weake of limbe, and sicke of love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He woxe, that lenger he note stand upright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to his bed was brought, and layd above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like ruefull ghost, unable once to stirre or move.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when his mother saw, she in her mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was troubled sore, ne wist well what to weene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne could by search nor any meanes out find</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The secret cause and nature of his teene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereby she might apply some medicine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But weeping day and night did him attend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mourn'd to see her losse before her eyne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which griev'd her more that she it could not mend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see an helplesse evill double griefe doth lend.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nought could she read the roote of his disease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne weene what mister maladie it is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereby to seeke some meanes it to appease.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most did she thinke, but most she thought amis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That that same former fatall wound of his</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whyleare by Tryphon was not throughly healed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But closely rankled under th'orifis:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least did she thinke, that which he most concealed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That love it was, which in his hart lay unrevealed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therefore to Tryphon she againe doth hast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him doth chyde as false and fraudulent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That fayld the trust which she in him had plast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To cure her sonne, as he his faith had lent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who now was falne into new languishment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his old hurt, which was not throughly cured.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So backe he came unto her patient;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where searching every part, her well assured</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it was no old sore which his new paine procured;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But that it was some other maladie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or grief unknowne, which he could not discerne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So left he her withouten remedie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan her heart to faint, and quake, and earne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And inly troubled was the truth to learne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto himselfe she came, and him besought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now with faire speches, now with threatnings sterne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If ought lay hidden in his grieved thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It to reveale; who still her answered, there was nought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nathlesse she rested not so satisfide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But leaving watry gods, as booting nought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the shinie heaven in haste she hide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thence Apollo, King of Leaches, brought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Apollo came; who, soone as he had sought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through his disease, did by and by out find</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he did languish of some inward thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which afflicted his engrieved mind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which love he red to be, that leads each living kind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when he had unto his mother told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She gan thereat to fret and greatly grieve;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, comming to her sonne, gan first to scold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chyde at him that made her misbelieve:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But afterwards she gan him soft to shrieve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wooe with fair intreatie, to disclose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which of the Nymphes his heart so sore did mieve;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For sure she weend it was some one of those,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which he had lately scene, that for his love he chose.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now lesse she feared that same fatall read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That warned him of womens love beware,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which being ment of mortall creatures sead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For love of Nymphes she thought she need not care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But promist him, what ever wight she weare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she her love to him would shortly gaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So he her told: but soone as she did heare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Florimell it was which wrought his paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She gan afresh to chafe, and grieve in every vaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet since she saw the streight extremitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which his life unluckily was lay'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It was no time to scan the prophecie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether old Proteus true or false had sayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That his decay should happen by a mayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It's late in death of daunger to advize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or love forbid him, that is life denayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But rather gan in troubled mind devize</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How she that Ladies libertie might enterprize.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To Proteus selfe to sew she thought it vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who was the root and worker of her woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor unto any meaner to complaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But unto great king Neptune selfe did goe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, on her knee before him falling lowe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made humble suit unto his Majestic</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To graunt to her her sonnes life, which his foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A cruell Tyrant, had presumpteouslie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By wicked doome condemn'd a wretched death to die.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom God Neptune, softly smyling, thus:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Daughter, me seemes of double wrong ye plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst one that hath both wronged you and us;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For death t'adward I ween'd did appertaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To none but to the seas sole Soveraine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Read therefore who it is which this hath wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for what cause; the truth discover plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For never wight so evill did or thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But would some rightfull cause pretend, though rightly nought."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom she answer'd: "Then, it is by name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proteus, that hath ordayn'd my sonne to die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that a waift, the which by fortune came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon your seas, he claym'd as propertie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet nor his, nor his in equitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yours the waift by high prerogative.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore I humbly crave your Majestic</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It to replevie, and my sonne reprive.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So shall you by one gift save all us three alive."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He graunted it: and streight his warrant made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under the Sea-gods scale autenticall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Commaunding Proteus straight t'enlarge the mayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which wandring on his seas imperiall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He lately tooke, and sithence kept as thrall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which she receiving with meete thankefulnesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Departed straight to Proteus therewithall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, reading it with inward loathfulnesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was grieved to restore the pledge he did possesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet durst he not the warrant to withstand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But unto her delivered Florimell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom she receiving by the lilly hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Admyr'd her beautie much, as she mote well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she all living creatures did excell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And was right joyous that she gotten had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So faire a wife for her sonne Marinell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So home with her she streight the virgin lad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shewed her to him, then being sore bestad.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who soone as he beheld that angels face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adorn'd with all divine perfection,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His cheared heart eftsoones away gan chace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sad death, revived with her sweet inspection,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And feeble spirit inly felt refection:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As withered weed through cruell winters tine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That feeles the warmth of sunny beames reflection,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Liftes up his head that did before decline,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gins to spread his leafe before the faire sunshine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Right so himselfe did Marinell upreare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When he in place his dearest love did spy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And though his limbs could not his bodie beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne former strength returne so suddenly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet chearefull signes he shewed outwardly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne lesse was she in secret hart affected,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that she masked it with modestie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For feare she should of lightnesse be detected:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which to another place I leave to be perfected.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="book-5" epub:type="part z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Containing the Legend of Artegall, or of Justice</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="book-5-prologue" epub:type="prologue">
				<p>
					<span>So oft as I with state of present time</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The image of the antique world compare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When as mans age was in his freshest prime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the first blossome of faire vertue bare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such oddes I finde twixt those, and these which are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As that, through long continuance of his course,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me seemes the world is runne quite out of square</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the first point of his appointed sourse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And being once amisse growes daily wourse and wourse:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For from the golden age, that first was named,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It's now at earst become a stonie one;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And men themselves, the which at first were framed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of earthly mould, and form'd of flesh and bone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are now transformed into hardest stone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as behind their backs (so backward bred)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were throwne by Pyrrha and Deucalione:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if then those may any worse be red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They into that ere long will be degendered.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Let none then blame me, if in discipline</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of vertue and of civill uses lore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I doe not forme them to the common line</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of present dayes, which are corrupted sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to the antique use which was of yore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When good was onely for it selfe desyred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all men sought their owne, and none no more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When Justice was not for most meed out-hyred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But simple Truth did rayne, and was of all admyred.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For that which all men then did vertue call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is now cald vice; and that which vice was hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is now hight vertue, and so us'd of all:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right now is wrong, and wrong that was is right;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As all things else in time are chaunged quight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne wonder; for the heavens revolution</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is wandred farre from where it first was pight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so doe make contrarie constitution</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all this lower world, toward his dissolution.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For who so list into the heavens looke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And search the courses of the rowling spheares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall find that from the point where they first tooke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their setting forth, in these few thousand yeares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They all are wandred much; that plaine appeares:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that same golden fleecy Ram, which bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Phrixus and Helle from their step-dames feares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath now forgot where he was plast of yore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shouldred hath the Bull which fayre Europa bore</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And eke the Bull hath with his bow-bent home</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So hardly butted those two twins of Jove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they have crusht the Crab, and quite him borne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the great Nemasan lions grove.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So now all range, and doe at randon rove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of their proper places farre away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all this world with them amisse doe move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all his creatures from their course astray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till they arrive at their last ruinous decay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne is that same great glorious lampe of light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That doth enlumine all these lesser fyres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In better case, ne keepes his course more right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But is miscaried with the other Spheres:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For since the terme of fourteene hundred yeres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That learned Ptolomase his hight did take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He is declyned from that marke of theirs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nigh thirtie minutes to the Southerne lake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That makes me feare in time he will us quite forsake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And if to those Egyptian wisards old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which in Star-read were wont have best insight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faith may be given, it is by them told</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That since the time they first tooke the Sunnes hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Foure times his place he shifted hath in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And twice hath risen where he now doth West,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wested twice where he ought rise aright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But most is Mars amisse of all the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And next to him old Saturne, that was wont be best.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For during Saturnes ancient raigne it's sayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the world with goodnesse did abound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All loved vertue, no man was affrayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of force, ne fraud in wight was to be found:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No warre was knowne, no dreadfull trompets sound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Peace universall rayn'd mongst men and beasts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all things freely grew out of the ground:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Justice sate high ador'd with solemne feasts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to all people did divide her dred beheasts:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Most sacred vertue she of all the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Resembling God in his imperiall might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose soveraine powre is herein most exprest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That both to good and bad he dealeth right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all his workes with Justice hath bedight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That powre he also doth to Princes lend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And makes them like himselfe in glorious sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sit in his own seate, his cause to end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rule his people right, as he doth recommend.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Dread Soverayne Goddesse, that doest highest sit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In seate of judgement in th'Almighties stead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with magnificke might and wondrous wit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doest to thy people righteous doome aread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That furthest Nations filles with awful dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pardon the boldnesse of thy basest thrall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That dare discourse of so divine a read</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As thy great justice, praysed over-all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The instrument whereof loe! here thy Artegall.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Artegall trayn'd in Justice lore</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Irenes quest pursewed:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He doth avenge on Sanglier</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">His Ladies bloud embrewed.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Though vertue then were held in highest price,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In those old times of which I doe entreat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet then likewise the wicked seede of vice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began to spring; which shortly grew full great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with their boughes the gentle plants did beat:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But evermore some of the vertuous race</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rose up, inspired with heroicke heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That cropt the branches of the sient base,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with strong hand their fruitful rancknes did deface.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such first was Bacchus, that with furious might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All th'East, before untam'd, did over-ronne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wrong repressed, and establisht right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which lawlesse men had formerly fordonne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There Justice first her princely rule begonne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Next Hercules his like ensample shewed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who all the West with equall conquest wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And monstrous tyrants with his club subdewed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The club of Justice dread with kingly powre endewed,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And such was he of whom I have to tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Champion of true Justice, Artegall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom (as ye lately mote remember well)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An hard adventure, which did then befall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into redoubted perill forth did call;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was to succour a distressed Dame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom a strong tyrant did unjustly thrall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from the heritage, which she did clame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did with strong hand withhold; Grantorto was his name.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Wherefore the Lady, which Irena hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did to the Faery Queene her way addresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom complayning her afflicted plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She her besought of gratious redresse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That soveraine Queene, that mightie Emperesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose glorie is to aide all suppliants pore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of weake Princes to be Patronesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Chose Artegall to right her to restore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that to her he seem'd best skild in righteous lore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For Artegall injustice was upbrought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even from the cradle of his infancie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the depth of rightfull doome was taught</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By faire Astraea with great industrie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilest here on earth she lived mortallie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For till the world from his perfection fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into all filth and foule iniquitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Astraea here mongst earthly men did dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the rules of justice them instructed well.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whiles through the world she walked in this sort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a day she found this gentle childe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst his peres playing his childish sport;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom seeing fit, and with no crime defilde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She did allure with gifts and speaches milde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wend with her. So thence him farre she brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into a cave from companie exilde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which she noursled him till yeares he raught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the discipline of justice there him taught.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There she him taught to weigh both right and wrong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In equal ballance with due recompence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And equitie to measure out along</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">According to the line of conscience,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When so it needs with rigour to dispence:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the which, for want there of mankind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She caused him to make experience</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon wyld beasts, which she in woods did find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With wrongfull powre oppressing others of their kind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus she him trayned, and thus she him taught</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In all the skill of deeming wrong and right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill the ripenesse of mans yeares he raught;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That even wilde beasts did feare his awfull sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And men admyr'd his over-ruling might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne any liv'd on ground that durst withstand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His dreadfull heast, much lesse him match in fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or bide the horror of his wreakfull hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When so he list in wrath lift up his steely brand.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which steely brand, to make him dreaded more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She gave unto him, gotten by her slight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And earnest search, where it was kept in store</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Joves eternall house, unwist of wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since he himselfe it us'd in that great fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the Titans, that whylome rebelled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst highest heaven: Chrysaor it was hight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Chrysaor, that all other swords excelled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well prov'd in that same day when Jove those Gyants quelled</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For of most perfect metall it was made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tempred with Adamant amongst the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And garnisht all with gold upon the blade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In goodly wise, whereof it tooke his name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And was of no lesse vertue then of fame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For there no substance was so firme and hard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But it would pierce or cleave, where so it came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne any armour could his dint out-ward;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But wheresoever it did light, it throughly shard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now, when the world with sinne gan to abound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Astraea loathing lenger here to space</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst wicked men, in whom no truth she found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Return'd to heaven, whence she deriv'd her race;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where she hath now an everlasting place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst those twelve signes, which nightly we doe see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The heavens bright-shining baudricke to enchace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And is the Virgin, sixt in her degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And next her selfe her righteous ballance hanging bee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when she parted hence she left her groome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An yron man, which did on her attend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alwayes to execute her stedfast doome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And willed him with Artegall to wend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doe what ever thing he did intend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His name was Talus, made of yron mould,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Immoveable, resistlesse, without end;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who in his hand a yron flale did hould,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With which he thresht out falshood, and did truth unfould.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He now went with him in this new inquest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him for to aide, if aide he chaunst to neede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against that cruell Tyrant, which opprest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The faire Irena with his foule misdeede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And kept the crowne in which she should succeed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now together on their way they bin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When as they saw a Squire in squallid weed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lamenting sore his sorrowfull sad tyne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With many bitter teares shed from his blubbred eyne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom as they approched, they espide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A sorie sight as ever scene with eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An headlesse Ladie lying him beside</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In her owne blood all wallow'd wofully,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her gay clothes did in discolour die.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much was he moved at that ruefull sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And flam'd with zeale of vengeance inwardly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He askt who had that Dame so fouly dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or whether his owne hand, or whether other wight?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ah! woe is me, and well-away!" (quoth hee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bursting forth teares like springs out of a banke),</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"That ever I this dismall day did see!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full farre was I from thinking such a pranke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet litle losse it were, and mickle thanke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If I should graunt that I have doen the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I mote drinke the cup whereof she dranke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that I should die guiltie of the blame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which another did, who now is fled with shame."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Who was it then," (sayd Artegall) "that wrought?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And why? doe it declare unto me trew."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"A knight," (said he) "if knight he may be thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That did his hand in Ladies bloud embrew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for no cause, but as I shall you shew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This day as I in solace sate hereby</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a fayre love, whose losse I now do rew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There came this knight, having in companie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This lucklesse Ladie which now here doth headlesse lie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"He, whether mine seem'd fayrer in his eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that he wexed weary of his owne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would change with me, but I did it denye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So did the Ladies both, as may be knowne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he, whose spirit was with pride upblowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would not so rest contented with his right;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, having from his courser her downe throwne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fro me reft mine away by lawlesse might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on his steed her set to beare her out of sight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Which when his Ladie saw, she follow'd fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on him catching hold gan loud to crie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not so to leave her, nor away to cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But rather of his hand besought to die.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that his sword he drew all wrathfully,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at one stroke cropt off her head with scorne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In that same place whereas it now doth lie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So he my love away with him hath borne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And left me here both his and mine owne love to morne."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Aread" (sayd he) "which way then did he make?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by what markes may he be knowne againe?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"To hope" (quoth he) "him soone to overtake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hence so long departed, is but vaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yet he pricked over yonder plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, as I marked, bore upon his shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which it's easie him to know againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A broken sword within a bloodie field;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Expressing well his nature which the same did wield."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>No sooner sayd, but streight he after sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His yron page, who him pursew'd so light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As that it seem'd above the ground he went;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he was swift as swallow in her flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strong as Lyon in his lordly might.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It was not long before he overtooke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir Sanglier, (so cleeped was that Knight)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom at the first he ghessed by his looke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by the other markes which of his shield he tooke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He bad him stay, and backe with him retire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, full of scorne to be commaunded so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Lady to alight did eft require,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilest he reformed that uncivill fo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And streight at him with all his force did go;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who mov'd no more therewith, then when a rocke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is lightly stricken with some stones throw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to him leaping lent him such a knocke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That on the ground he layd him like a sencelesse blocke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, ere he could him selfe recure againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him in his iron paw he seized had;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That when he wak't out of his warelesse paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He found him selfe unwist so ill bestad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That lim he could not wag: Thence he him lad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bound like a beast appointed to the stall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sight whereof the Lady sore adrad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fain'd to fly for feare of being thrall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he her quickly stayd, and forst to wend withall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When to the place they came, where Artegall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By that same carefull Squire did then abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gently gan him to demaund of all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That did betwixt him and that Squire betide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who with sterne countenance and indignant pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did aunswere, that of all he guiltlesse stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his accuser thereuppon deride;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For neither he did shed that Ladies bloud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor tooke away his love, but his owne proper good.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Well did the Squire perceive him selfe too weake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To aunswere his defiaunce in the field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rather chose his challenge off to breake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then to approve his right with speare and shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rather guilty chose himselfe to yield:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Artegall by signes perceiving plaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he it was not which that Lady kild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that strange Knight, the fairer love to gaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did cast about by sleight the truth thereout to straine;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And sayd; "Now sure this doubtfull causes right</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can hardly but by Sacrament be tride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or else by ordele, or by blooddy fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ill perhaps mote fall to either side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if ye please that I your cause decide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perhaps I may all further quarrell end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So ye will sweare my judgement to abide."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereto they both did franckly condiscend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to his doome with listfull eares did both attend.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Sith then," (sayd he) "ye both the dead deny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both the living Lady claime your right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let both the dead and living equally</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Devided be betwixt you here in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And each of either take his share aright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But looke, who does dissent from this my read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He for a twelve moneths day shall in despight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beare for his penaunce that same Ladies head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To witnesse to the world that she by him is dead."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Well pleased with that doome was Sangliere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And offred streight the Lady to be slaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that same Squire, to whom she was more dere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When as he saw she should be cut in twaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did yield she rather should with him remaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alive, then to him selfe be shared dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rather then his love should suffer paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He chose with shame to beare that Ladies head:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>True love despiseth shame, when life is cald in dread.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when so willing Artegall perceaved;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Not so, thou Squire," (he sayd) "but thine I deeme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The living Lady, which from thee he reaved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For worthy thou of her doest rightly seeme.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And you, Sir Knight, that love so light esteeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As that ye would for little leave the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Take here your owne, that doth you best beseeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with it beare the burden of defame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your owne dead Ladies head, to tell abrode your shame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Sangliere disdained much his doome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sternly gan repine at his beheast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne would for ought obay, as did become,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To beare that Ladies head before his breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until that Talus had his pride represt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And forced him, maulgre, it up to reare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who when he saw it bootelesse to resist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He tooke it up, and thence with him did beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As rated Spaniell takes his burden up for feare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Much did that Squire Sir Artegall adore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For his great justice, held in high regard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as his Squire him offred evermore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To serve, for want of other meete reward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wend with him on his adventure hard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he thereto would by no meanes consent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But leaving him forth on his journey far'd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne wight with him but onely Talus went;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They two enough t'encounter an whole Regiment.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Artegall heares of Florimell;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Does with the Pagan fight:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Him slaies; drownes Lady Munera</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Does race her castle quight.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Nought is more honorable to a knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne better doth beseeme brave chevalry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then to defend the feeble in their right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wrong redresse in such as wend awry:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilome those great Heroes got thereby</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their greatest glory for their rightfull deedes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And place deserved with the Gods on hy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Herein the noblesse of this knight exceedes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who now to perils great for justice sake proceedes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To which as he now was uppon the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He chaunst to meet a Dwarfe in hasty course,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom he requir'd his forward hast to stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till he of tidings mote with him discourse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Loth was the Dwarfe, yet did he stay perforse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gan of sundry newes his store to tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As to his memory they had recourse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But chiefly of the fairest Florimell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How she was found againe, and spousde to Marinell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For this was Dony, Florimels owne Dwarfe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom having lost, (as ye have heard whyleare)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And finding in the way the scattred scarfe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fortune of her life long time did feare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But of her health when Artegall did heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And safe returne, he was full inly glad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And askt him where and when her bridale cheare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should be solemniz'd; for, if time he had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would be there, and honor to her spousall ad.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Within three daies," (quoth he) "as I do here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It will be at the Castle of the Strond;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What time, if naught me let, I will be there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To doe her service so as I am bond:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in my way, a little here beyond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A cursed cruell Sarazin doth wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That keepes a Bridges passage by strong hond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many errant Knights hath there fordonne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That makes all men for feare that passage for to shonne."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"What mister wight," (quoth he) "and how far hence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is he, that doth to travellers such harmes?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"He is" (said he) "a man of great defence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Expert in battell and in deedes of armes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And more emboldned by the wicked charmes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which his daughter doth him still support;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having great Lordships got and goodly farmes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through strong oppression of his powre extort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By which he stil them holds, and keepes with strong effort.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And dayly he his wrongs encreaseth more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For never wight he lets to passe that way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over his Bridge, albee he rich or poore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he him makes his passage-penny pay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Else he doth hold him backe or beat away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereto he hath a groome of evill guize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose scalp is bare, that bondage doth bewray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which pols and pils the poore in piteous wize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he him selfe uppon the rich doth tyrannize.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"His name is hight Pollente, rightly so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that he is so puissant and strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with his powre he all doth overgo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And makes them subject to his mighty wrong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And some by sleight he eke doth underfong.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For on a Bridge he custometh to fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which is but narrow, but exceeding long;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the same are many trap-fals pight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through which the rider downe doth fall through oversight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And underneath the same a river flowes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is both swift and dangerous deepe withall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the which whom so he overthrowes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All destitute of helpe doth headlong fall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he him selfe through practise usuall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Leapes forth into the floud, and there assaies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His foe confused through his sodaine fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That horse and man he equally dismaies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And either both them drownes, or trayterously slaies.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Then doth he take the spoile of them at will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to his daughter brings, that dwels thereby;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who all that comes doth take, and therewith fill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The coffers of her wicked threasury,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which she with wrongs hath heaped up so hy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That many Princes she in wealth exceedes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And purchast all the countrey lying ny</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the revenue of her plenteous meedes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her name is Munera, agreeing with her deedes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Thereto she is full faire, and rich attired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With golden hands and silver feete beside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That manv Lords have her to wife desired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she them all despiseth for great pride."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Now by my life," (sayd he) "and God to guide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">None other way will I this day betake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by that Bridge whereas he doth abide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore me thither lead." No more he spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thitherward forthright his ready way did make.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Unto the place he came within a while,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where on the Bridge he ready armed saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Sarazin, awayting for some spoile:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When as they to the passage gan to draw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A villaine to them came with scull all raw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That passage money did of them require,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">According to the custome of their law:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom he aunswerd wroth, "Loe! there thy hire;"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with that word him strooke, that streight he did expire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when the Pagan saw he wexed wroth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And streight him selfe unto the fight addrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne was Sir Artegall behmde: so both</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Together ran with ready speares in rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right in the midst, whereas they brest to brest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should meete, a trap was letten downe to fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the floud: streight leapt the Carle unblest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well weening that his foe was falne withall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he was well aware, and leapt before his fall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There being both together in the floud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They each at other tyrannously flew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought the water cooled their whot bloud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But rather in them kindled choler new:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But there the Paynim, who that use well knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To fight in water, great advantage had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That oftentimes him nigh he overthrew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the courser whereuppon he rad</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could swim like to a fish, whiles he his backe bestrad.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which oddes when as Sir Artegall espide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He saw no way but close with him in hast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to him driving strongly downe the tide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uppon his iron coller griped fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with the straint his wesand nigh he brast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There they together strove and struggled long</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Either the other from his steede to cast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever Artegall his griple strong</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For any thing wold slacke, but still upon him hong.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when a Dolphin and a Sele are met</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the wide champian of the Ocean plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With cruell chaufe their courages they whet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The maysterdome of each by force to gaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dreadfull battaile twixt them do darraine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They snuf, they snort, they bounce, they rage, they rore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the sea, disturbed with their traine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth frie with fome above the surges hore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such was betwixt these two the troublesome uprore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So Artegall at length him forst forsake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His horses backe for dread of being drownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to his handy swimming him betake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones him selfe he from his hold unbownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then no ods at all in him he fownd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Artegall in swimming skilfull was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And durst the depth of any water sownd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So ought each Knight, that use of perill has,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In swimming be expert, through waters force to pas.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then very doubtfull was the warres event,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uncertaine whether had the better side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For both were skild in that experiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both in armes well traind, and throughly tride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Artegall was better breath'd beside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And towards th'end grew greater in his might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That his faint foe no longer could abide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His puissance, ne beare him selfe upright;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But from the water to the land betooke his flight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Artegall pursewd him still so neare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With bright Chrysaor in his cruell hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That as his head he gan a litle reare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above the brincke to tread upon the land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He smote it off, that tumbling on the strand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It bit the earth for very fell despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gnashed with his teeth, as if he band</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">High God, whose goodnesse he despaired quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or curst the hand which did that vengeance on him dight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His corps was carried downe along the Lee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose waters with his filthy bloud it stayned;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But his blasphemous head, that all might see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He pitcht upon a pole on high ordayned;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where many years it afterwards remayned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be a mirrour to all mighty men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In whose right hands great power is contayned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none of them the feeble over-ren,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But alwaies doe their powre within just compasse pen.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That done, unto the Castle he did wend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which the Paynims daughter did abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Guarded of many which did her defend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whom he entrance sought, but was denide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with reprochfull blasphemy defide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beaten with stones downe from the battilment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he was forced to withdraw aside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bad his servant Talus to invent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which way he enter might without endangerment.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones his Page drew to the Castle gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his iron flale at it let flie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the warders it did sore amate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which erewhile spake so reprochfully,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made them stoupe that looked earst so hie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet still he bet and bounst uppon the dore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thundred strokes thereon so hideouslie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the peece he shaked from the flore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And filled all the house with feare and great uprore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With noise whereof the Lady forth appeared</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uppon the Castle wall; and, when she saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The daungerous state in which she stood, she feared</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sad effect of her neare overthrow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gan entreat that iron man below</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To cease his outrage, and him faire besought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith neither force of stones which they did throw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor powr of charms, which she against him wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might otherwise prevaile, or make him cease for ought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, when as yet she saw him to proceede</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unmov'd with praiers or with piteous thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She ment him to corrupt with goodly meede;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And causde great sackes with endlesse riches fraught</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the battilment to be upbrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And powred forth over the Castle wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she might win some time, though dearly bought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilest he to gathering of the gold did fall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he was nothing mov'd nor tempted therewithall:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But still continu'd his assault the more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And layd on load with his huge yron flaile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That at the length he has yrent the dore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made way for his maister to assaile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who being entred, nought did then availe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For wight against his powre them selves to reare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each one did flie; their hearts began to faile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hid them selves in corners here and there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke their dame halfe dead did hide her self for feare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Long they her sought, yet no where could they finde her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sure they ween'd she was escapt away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Talus, that could like a lime-hound winde her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all things secrete wisely could bewray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At length found out whereas she hidden lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under an heape of gold. Thence he her drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By the faire lockes, and fowly did array</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withouten pitty of her goodly hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Artegall him selfe her seemelesse plight did rew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet for no pitty would he change the course</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Justice, which in Talus hand did lye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who rudely hayld her forth without remorse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still holding up her suppliant hands on hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And kneeling at his feete submissively:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he her suppliant hands, those hands of gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke her feete, those feete of silver trye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which sought unrighteousnesse, and justice sold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chopt off, and nayld on high that all might them behold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her selfe then tooke he by the sclender wast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In vaine loud crying, and into the flood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over the Castle wall adowne her cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there her drowned in the durty mud;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the streame washt away her guilty blood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereafter all that mucky pelfe he tooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The spoile of peoples evil gotten good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which her sire had scrap't by hooke and crooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And burning all to ashes powr'd it downe the brooke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And lastly all that Castle quite he raced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even from the sole of his foundation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the hewen stones thereof defaced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That there mote be no hope of reparation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor memory thereof to any nation.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which when Talus throughly had perfourmed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir Artegall undid the evill fashion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wicked customes of that Bridge refourmed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which done, unto his former journey he retourned:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In which they measur'd mickle weary way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that at length nigh to the sea they drew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which as they did travell on a day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They saw before them, far as they could vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full many people gathered in a crew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose great assembly they did much admire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For never there the like resort they knew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So towardes them they coasted, to enquire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What thing so many nations met did there desire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There they beheld a mighty Gyant stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a rocke, and holding forth on hie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An huge great paire of ballance in his hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which he boasted, in his surquedrie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the world he would weigh equallie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If ought he had the same to counterpoys;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For want whereof he weighed vanity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fild his ballaunce full of idle toys:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet was admired much of fooles, women, and boys.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He sayd that he would all the earth uptake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the sea, divided each from either:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So would he of the fire one ballaunce make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And one of th'ayre, without or wind or wether:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then would he ballaunce heaven and hell together,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all that did within them all containe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all whose weight he would not misse a fether:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And looke what surplus did of each remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would to his owne part restore the same againe:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For-why, he sayd, they all unequall were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And had encroched upon others share;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as the sea (which plaine he shewed there)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had worne the earth; so did the fire the aire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So all the rest did others parts empaire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so were realmes and nations run awry.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which he undertooke for to repaire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In sort as they were formed aunciently,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all things would reduce unto equality.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therefore the vulgar did about him flocke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cluster thicke unto his leasings vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like foolish flies about an hony-crocke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hope by him great benefite to gaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And uncontrolled freedome to obtaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which when Artegall did see and heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How he mis-led the simple peoples traine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In sdeignfull wize he drew unto him neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus unto him spake, without regard or feare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Thou that presum'st to weigh the world anew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all things to an equall to restore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Instead of right me seemes great wrong dost shew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And far above thy forces pitch to sore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ere thou limit what is lesse or more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In every thing, thou oughtest first to know</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What was the poyse of every part of yore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And looke then how much it doth overflow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or faile thereof, so much is more then just to trow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"For at the first they all created were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In goodly measure by their Makers might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And weighed out in ballaunces so nere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That not a dram was missing of their right:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The earth was in the middle centre pight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which it doth immoveable abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hemd in with waters like a wall in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And they with aire, that not a drop can slide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Al which the heavens containe, and in their courses guide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Such heavenly justice doth among them raine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That every one doe know their certaine bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which they doe these many yeares remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mongst them al no change hath yet beene found;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if thou now shouldst weigh them new in pound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We are not sure they would so long remaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All change is perillous, and all chaunce unsound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore leave off to weigh them all againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till we may be assur'd they shall their course retaine."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Thou foolishe Elfe," (said then the Gyant wroth)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Seest not how badly all things present bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And each estate quite out of order goth?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sea it selfe doest thou not plainely see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Encroch uppon the land there under thee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And th'earth it selfe how daily its encreast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By all that dying to it turned be:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were it not good that wrong were then surceast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the most that some were given to the least?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Therefore I will throw downe these mountaines hie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And make them levell with the lowly plaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These towring rocks, which reach unto the skie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I will thrust downe into the deepest maine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, as they were, them equalize againe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tyrants, that make men subject to their law,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I will suppresse, that they no more may raine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Lordings curbe that commons over-aw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the wealth of rich men to the poore will draw."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Of things unseene how canst thou deeme aright,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then answered the righteous Artegall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Sith thou misdeem'st so much of things in sight?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What though the sea with waves continuall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe eate the earth, it is no more at all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne is the earth the lesse, or loseth ought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For whatsoever from one place doth fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is with the tide unto another brought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For there is nothing lost, that may be found if sought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Likewise the earth is not augmented more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By all that dying into it doe fade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For of the earth they formed were of yore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How ever gay their blossome or their blade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe flourish now, they into dust shall vade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What wrong then is it, if that when they die</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They turne to that whereof they first were made?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All in the powre of their great Maker lie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All creatures must obey the voice of the Most Hie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"They live, they die, like as he doth ordaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever any asketh reason why.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hils doe not the lowly dales disdaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dales doe not the lofty hils envy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He maketh Kings to sit in soverainty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He maketh subjects to their powre obay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He pulleth downe, he setteth up on hy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gives to this, from that he takes away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all we have is his: what he list doe, he may.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"What ever thing is done by him is donne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne any may his mighty will withstand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne any may his soveraine power shonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne loose that he hath bound with stedfast band.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In vaine therefore doest thou now take in hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To call to count, or weigh his workes anew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose counsels depth thou canst not understand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith of things subject to thy daily vew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou doest not know the causes, nor their courses dew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"For take thy ballaunce, if thou be so wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And weigh the winde that under heaven doth blow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or weigh the light that in the East doth rise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or weigh the thought that from mans mind doth flow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if the weight of these thou canst not show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weigh but one word which from thy lips doth fall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For how canst thou those greater secrets know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That doest not know the least thing of them all?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ill can he rule the great that cannot reach the small."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith the Gyant much abashed sayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he of little things made reckoning light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet the least word that ever could be layd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within his ballaunce he could way aright.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Which is" (sayd he) "more heavy then in weight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The right or wrong, the false or else the trew?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He answered that he would try it streight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So he the words into his ballaunce threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But streight the winged words out of his ballaunce flew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Wroth wcxt he then, and sayd that words were light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne would within his ballaunce well abide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he could justly weigh the wrong or right.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Well then," sayd Artegall, "let it be tride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First in one ballance set the true aside."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He did so first, and then the false he layd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In th'other scale; but still it downe did slide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by no meane could in the weight be stayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For by no meanes the false will with the truth be wayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Now take the right likewise," sayd Artegale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"And counterpeise the same with so much wrong."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So first the right he put into one scale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then the Gyant strove with puissance strong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To fill the other scale with so much wrong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all the wrongs that he therein could lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might not it peise; yet did he labour long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And swat, and chauf d, and proved every way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet all the wrongs could not a litle right downe way.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when he saw he greatly grew in rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And almost would his balances have broken;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Artegall him fairely gan asswage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said, "Be not upon thy balance wroken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For they doe nought but right or wrong betoken;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in the mind the doome of right must bee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so likewise of words, the which be spoken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The eare must be the ballance, to decree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And judge, whether with truth or falshood they agree.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But set the truth and set the right aside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For they with wrong or falshood will not fare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And put two wrongs together to be tnde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or else two falses, of each equall share,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then together doe them both compare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For truth is one, and right is ever one."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So did he; and then plaine it did appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether of them the greater were attone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But right sate in the middest of the beame alone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But he the fight from thence did thrust away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For it was not the right which he did seeke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But rather strove extremities to way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th'one to diminish, th'other for to eeke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For of the meane he greatly did misleeke.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when so lewdly minded Talus found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Approching nigh unto him, cheeke by cheeke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He shouldered him from off the higher ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, down the rock him throwing, in the sea him dround.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like as a ship, whom cruell tempest drives</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a rocke with horrible dismay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her shattered ribs in thousand peeces rives,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And spoyling all her geares and goodly ray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Does make her selfe misfortunes piteous pray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So downe the cliffe the wretched Gyant tumbled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His battred ballances in peeces lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His timbered bones all broken rudely rumbled:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So was the high-aspyring with huge ruine humbled.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That when the people, which had there about</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long wayted, saw his sudden desolation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They gan to gather in tumultuous rout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mutining to stirre up civill faction</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For certaine losse of so great expectation:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For well they hoped to have got great good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wondrous riches by his innovation.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore resolving to revenge his blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They rose in armes, and all in battell order stood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which lawlesse multitude him comming too</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In warlike wise when Artegall did vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He much was troubled, ne wist what to doo:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For loth he was his noble hands t'embrew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the base blood of such a rascall crew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And otherwise, if that he should retire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He fear'd least they with shame would him pursew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore he Talus to them sent t'inquire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cause of their array, and truce for to desire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But soone as they him nigh approching spide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They gan with all their weapons him assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rudely stroke at him on every side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet nought they could him hurt, ne ought dismay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when at them he with his flaile gan lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He like a swarme of flyes them overthrew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne any of them durst come in his way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But here and there before his presence flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hid themselves in holes and bushes from his vew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when a Faulcon hath with nimble flight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flowne at a flush of Ducks foreby the brooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The trembling foule dismayd with dreadfull sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of death, the which them almost overtooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe hide themselves from her astonying looke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst the flags and covert round about.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When Talus saw they all the field forsooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And none appeared of all that raskall rout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Artegall he turn'd and went with him throughout.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-3" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The Spousals of faire Florimell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Where turney many Knights;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There Braggadochio is uncas'd</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In all the Ladies sights.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>After long stormes and tempests overblowne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sunne at length his joyous face doth cleare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So when as fortune all her spight hath showne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some blisfull houres at last must needes appeare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Else should afflicted wights oftimes despeire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So comes it now to Florimell by tourne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After long sorrowes suffered whyleare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which captiv'd she many moneths did mourne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tast of joy, and to wont pleasures to retourne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who being freed from Proteus cruell band</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By Marinell was unto him affide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by him brought againe to Faerie land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where he her spous'd, and made his joyous bride.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The time and place was blazed farre and wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And solemne feasts and giusts ordain'd therefore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which there did resort from every side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Lords and Ladies infinite great store;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne any Knight was absent that brave courage bore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To tell the glorie of the feast that day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The goodly service, the devicefull sights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bridegromes state, the brides most rich aray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The pride of Ladies, and the worth of knights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The royall banquets, and the rare delights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were worke fit for an Herauld, not for me:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But for so much as to my lot here lights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with this present treatise doth agree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>True vertue to advance, shall here recounted bee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When all men had with full satietie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of meates and drinkes their appetites suffiz'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To deedes of armes and proofe of chevalrie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They gan themselves addresse, full rich aguiz'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As each one had his furnitures deviz'd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And first of all issu'd Sir Marinell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with him sixe knights more, which enterpriz'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To chalenge all in right of Florimell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to maintaine that she all others did excell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The first of them was hight Sir Orimont,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A noble Knight, and tride in hard assayes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The second had to name Sir Bellisont,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But second unto none in prowesse prayse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The third was Brunell, famous in his dayes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fourth Ecastor, of exceeding might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fift Armeddan, skild in lovely layes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sixt was Lansack, a redoubted Knight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All sixe well-scene in armes, and prov'd in many a fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And them against came all that list to giust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From every coast and countrie under sunne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">None was debard, but all had leave that lust.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The trompets sound, then all together ronne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full many deeds of armes that day were donne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many knights unhorst, and many wounded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As fortune fell; yet little lost or wonne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all that day the greatest prayse redounded</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Marinell, whose name the Heralds loud resounded.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The second day, so soone as morrow light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Appear'd in heaven, into the field they came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there all day continew'd cruell fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With divers fortune fit for such a game,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which all strove with perill to winne fame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet whether side was viclor note be ghest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But at the last the trompets did proclame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Marinell that day deserved best.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So they disparted were, and all men went to rest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The third day came, that should due tryall lend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the rest; and then this warlike crew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Together met of all to make an end.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There Marinell great deeds of armes did shew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through the thickest like a Lyon flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rashing off helmes, and ry ving plates asonder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That every one his daunger did eschew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So terribly his dreadfull strokes did thonder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all men stood amaz'd, and at his might did wonder.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But what on earth can alwayes happie stand?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The greater prowesse greater perils find.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So farre he past amongst his enemies band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they have him enclosed so behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As by no meanes he can himselfe outwind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now perforce they have him prisoner taken;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now they doe with captive bands him bind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now they lead him thence, of all forsaken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unlesse some succour had in time him overtaken.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It fortun'd, whylest they were thus ill beset,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir Artegall into the Tilt-yard came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Braggadochio, whom he lately met</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the way with that his snowy Dame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where when he understood by common fame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What evil hap to Marinell betid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He much was mov'd at so unworthie shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And streight that boaster prayd, with whom he rid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To change his shield with him, to be the better hid.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So forth he went, and soone them over-hent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where they were leading Marinell away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom he assayld with dreadlesse hardiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And forst the burden of their prize to stay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They were an hundred knights of that array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which th'one halfe upon himselfe did set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other stayd behind to gard the pray:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he ere long the former fiftie bet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the other fiftie soone the prisoner fet.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So backe he brought Sir Marinell againe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom having quickly arm'd againe anew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They both together joyned might and maine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To set afresh on all the other crew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom with sore havocke soone they overthrew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chaced quite out of the field, that none</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against them durst his head to perill shew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So were they left Lords of the field alone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So Marinell by him was rescu'd from his fone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when he had perform'd, then backe againe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Braggadochio did his shield restore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who all this while behind him did remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Keeping there close with him in pretious store</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That his false Ladie, as ye heard afore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then did the trompets sound, and Judges rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all these knights, which that day armour bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came to the open hall to listen whose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The honour of the prize should be adjudg'd by those.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And thether also came in open sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayre Florimell, into the common hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To greet his guerdon unto every knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And best to him to whom the best should fall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then for that stranger knight they loud did call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom that day they should the girlond yield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who came not forth; but for Sir Artegall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came Braggadochio, and did shew his shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which bore the Sunne brode blazed in a golden field.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The sight whereof did all with gladnesse fill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So unto him they did addeeme the prise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all that Tryumph. Then the trompets shrill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Don Braggadochios name resounded thrise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So courage lent a cloke to cowardise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then to him came fayrest Florimell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And goodly gan to greet his brave emprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thousand thankes him yeeld, that had so well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Approv'd that day that she all others did excell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom the boaster, that all knights did blot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With proud disdaine did scornefull answere make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That what he did that day, he did it not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For her, but for his owne deare Ladies sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom on his perill he did undertake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both her and eke all others to excell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And further did uncomely speaches crake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much did his words the gentle Ladie quell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And turn'd aside for shame to heare what he did tell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then forth he brought his snowy Florimele,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom Trompart had in keeping there beside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Covered from peoples gazement with a vele:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when discovered they had throughly eide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With great amazement they were stupefide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said, that surely Florimell it was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or if it were not Florimell so tride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Florimell her selfe she then did pas.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So feeble skill of perfect things the vulgar has.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when as Marinell beheld likewise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He was therewith exceedingly dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne wist he what to thinke, or to devise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, like as one whom feends had made affrayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He long astonisht stood, ne ought he sayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought he did, but with fast fixed eies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gazed still upon that snowy mayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom ever as he did the more avize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The more to be true Florimell he did surmize.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when two sunnes appeare in the asure skye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mounted in Phoebus charet fierie bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both darting forth faire beames to each mans eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both adorn'd with lampes of flaming light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All that behold so strange prodigious sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not knowing natures worke, nor what to weene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are rapt with wonder and with rare affright.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So stood Sir Marinell, when he had scene</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The semblant of this false by his faire beauties Queene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All which when Artegall, who all this while</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stood in the preasse close covered, well advewed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saw that boasters pride and gracelesse guile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He could no longer beare, but forth issewed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto all himselfe there open shewed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the boaster said; "Thou losell base,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hast with borrowed plumes thy selfe endewed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And others worth with leasings doest deface,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When they are all restor'd thou shalt rest in disgrace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"That shield, which thou doest beare, was it indeed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which this dayes honour sav'd to Marinell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But not that arme, nor thou the man, I reed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which didst that service unto Florimell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For proofe shew forth thy sword, and let it tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What strokes, what dreadfull stoure, it stird this day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or shew the wounds which unto thee befell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or shew the sweat with which thou diddest sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So sharpe a battell, that so many did dismay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But this the sword which wrought those cruell stounds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And this the arme the which that shield did beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And these the signs" (so shewed forth his wounds)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"By which that glorie gotten doth appeare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As for this Ladie, which he sheweth here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is not (I wager) Florimell at all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But some fayre Franion, fit for such a fere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That by misfortune in his hand did fall."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For proofe whereof he bad them Florimell forth call.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So forth the noble Ladie was ybrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adorn'd with honor and all comely grace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereto her bashful shamefastnesse ywrought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A great increase in her faire blushing face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As roses did with lilies interlace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For of those words, the which that boaster threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She inly yet conceived great disgrace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when as all the people such did vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They shouted loud, and signes of gladnesse all did shew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then did he set her by that snowy one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like the true saint beside the image set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of both their beauties to make paragone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And triall, whether should the honor get.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Streight-way, so soone as both together met,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th'enchaunted Damzell vanisht into nought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her snowy substance melted as with heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne of that goodly hew remayned ought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But th'emptie girdle which about her wast was wrought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when the daughter of Thaumantes faire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath in a watry cloud displayed wide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her goodly bow, which paints the liquid ayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all men wonder at her colours pride;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All suddenly, ere one can looke aside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The glorious picture vanisheth away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne any token doth thereof abide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So did this Ladies goodly form decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And into nothing goe, ere one could it bewray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when as all that present were beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They stricken were with great astonishment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And their faint harts with senselesse horrour queld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see the thing, that seem'd so excellent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So stolen from their fancies wonderment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That what of it became none understood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Braggadochio selfe with dreriment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So daunted was in his despeyring mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That like a lifelesse corse immoveable he stood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Artegall that golden belt uptooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which of all her spoyle was onely left;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which was not hers, as many it mistooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Florimells owne girdle, from her reft</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While she was flying, like a weary weft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From that foule monster which did her compell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To perils great; which he unbuckling eft</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Presented to the fayrest Florimell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who round about her tender wast it fitted well.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Full many Ladies often had assayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About their middles that faire belt to knit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many a one suppos'd to be a mayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet it to none of all their loynes would fit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till Florimell about her fastned it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such power it had, that to no womans wast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By any skill or labour it would sit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unlesse that she were continent and chast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But it would lose or breake, that many had disgrast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whilest thus they busied were bout Florimell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And boastfull Braggadochio, to defame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir Guyon, as by fortune then befell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth from the thickest preasse of people came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His owne good steed, which he had stolne, to clame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And th'one hand seizing on his golden bit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With th'other drew his sword; for with the same</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He ment the thiefe there deadly to have smit:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, had he not bene held, he nought had fayld of it.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereof great hurly-burly moved was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throughout the hall for that same warlike horse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Braggadochio would not let him pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Guyon would him algates have perforse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or it approve upon his carrion corse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which troublous stirre when Artegall perceived,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He nigh them drew to stay th'avengers forse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gan inquire how was that steed bereaved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether by might extort, or else by slight deceaved?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who all that piteous storie, which befell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About that wofull couple which were slaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And their young bloodie babe to him gan tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With whom whiles he did in the wood remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His horse purloyned was by subtill traine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which he chalenged the thiefe to fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he for nought could him thereto constraine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For as the death he hated such despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rather had to lose then trie in armes his right.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which Artegall well hearing, (though no more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By law of armes there neede ones right to trie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As was the wont of warlike knights of yore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then that his foe should him the field denie,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, further right by tokens to descrie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He askt what privie tokens he did beare?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"If that" (said Guyon) "may you satisfie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within his mouth a blacke spot doth appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shapt like a horses shoe, who list to seeke it there."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whereof to make due tryall, one did take</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The horse in hand within his mouth to looke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with his heeles so sorely he him strake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all his ribs he quite in peeces broke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That never word from that day forth he spoke.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another, that would seeme to have more wit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him by the bright embrodered hed-stall tooke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by the shoulder him so sore he bit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he him maymed quite, and all his shoulder split.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne he his mouth would open unto wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill that Guyon selfe unto him spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And called Brigadore, (so was he hight,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose voice so soone as he did undertake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones he stood as still as any stake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And suffred all his secret marke to see:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, when as he him nam'd, for joy he brake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His bands, and follow'd him with gladfull glee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And friskt, and flong aloft, and louted low on knee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereby Sir Artegall did plaine areed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That unto him the horse belong'd, and sayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Lo there! Sir Guyon, take to you the steed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he with golden saddle is arayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And let that losell, plainely now displayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hence fare on foot, till he an horse have gayned."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the proud boaster gan his doome upbrayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him revil'd, and rated, and disdayned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That judgement so unjust against him had ordayned.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Much was the knight incenst with his lewd word</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To have revenged that his villeny;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thrise did lay his hand upon his sword,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To have him slaine, or dearely doen aby:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Guyon did his choler pacify,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saying, "Sir knight, it would dishonour bee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To you that are our judge of equity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wreake your wrath on such a carle as hee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It's punishment enough that all his shame doe see."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So did he mitigate Sir Artegall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Talus by the backe the boaster hent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And drawing him out of the open hall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon him did inflict this punishment:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First he his beard did shave, and fowly shent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then from him reft his shield, and it renverst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And blotted out his armes with falshood blent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And himselfe baffuld, and his armes unherst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And broke his sword in twaine, and all his armour sperst.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The whiles his guilefull groome was fled away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But vaine it was to thinke from him to flie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who overtaking him did disaray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all his face deform'd with infamie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And out of court him scourged openly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So ought all faytours that true knighthood shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And armes dishonour with base villanie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From all brave knights be banisht with defame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For oft their lewdnes blotteth good deserts with blame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now when these counterfeits were thus uncased</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the fore-side of their forgerie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the sight of all men cleane disgraced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All gan to jest and gibe full merilie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At the remembrance of their knaverie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ladies can laugh at Ladies, Knights at Knights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To thinke with how great vaunt of braverie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He them abused through his subtill slights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what a glorious shew he made in all their sights.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There leave we them in pleasure and repast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spending their joyous dayes and gladfull nights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And taking usurie of time fore-past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all deare delices and rare delights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fit for such Ladies and such lovely knights;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And turne we here to this faire furrowes end</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our wearie yokes, to gather fresher sprights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, when as time to Artegall shall tend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We on his first adventure may him forward send.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-4" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Artegall dealeth right betwixt</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Two brethren that doe strive:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Saves Terpine from the gallow tree,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And doth from death reprive.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Whoso upon him selfe will take the skill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">True Justice unto people to divide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had neede have mightie hands for to fulfill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That which he doth with righteous doome decide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for to maister wrong and puissant pride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For vaine it is to deeme of things aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And makes wrong doers justice to deride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unlesse it be perform'd with dreadlesse might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For powre is the right hand of Justice truely hight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therefore whylome to knights of great emprise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The charge of Justice given was in trust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they might execute her judgements wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with their might beat downe licentious lust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which proudly did impugne her sentence just:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof no braver president this day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Remaines on earth, preserv'd from yron rust</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of rude oblivion and long times decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then this of Artegall, which here we have to say.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who having lately left that lovely payre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enlincked fast in wedlockes loyall bond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bold Marinell with Florimell the fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With whom great feast and goodly glee he fond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Departed from the Castle of the Strond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To follow his adventures first intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which long agoe he taken had in hond:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne wight with him for his assistance went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that great yron groome, his gard and government.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With whom, as he did passe by the sea shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He chaunst to come whereas two comely Squires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both brethren, whom one wombe together bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But stirred up with different desires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Together strove, and kindled wrathfull fires:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And them beside two seemely damzells stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By all meanes seeking to asswage their ires;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now with faire words, but words did little good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now with sharpe threats, but threats the more increast their mood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And there before them stood a Coffer strong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fast bound on every side with iron bands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But seeming to have suffred mickle wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Either by being wreckt uppon the sands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or being carried farre from forraine lands.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seem'd that for it these Squires at ods did fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bent against them selves their cruell hands;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But evermore those Damzells did forestall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their furious encounter, and their fiercenesse pall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But firmely fixt they were with dint of sword</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And battailes doubtfull proofe their rights to try,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne other end their fury would afford,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But what to them Fortune would justify:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So stood they both in readinesse thereby</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To joyne the combate with cruell intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When Artegall, arriving happily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did stay a while their greedy bickerment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till he had questioned the cause of their dissent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom the elder did this aunswere frame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Then weete ye, Sir, that we two brethren be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom our sire, Milesio by name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did equally bequeath his lands in fee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two Hands, which ye there before you see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not farre in sea; of which the one appeares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But like a little Mount of small degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was as great and wide, ere many yeares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As that same other Isle, that greater bredth now beares.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But tract of time, that all things doth decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And this devouring Sea, that naught doth spare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The most part of my land hath washt away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And throwne it up unto my brothers share:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So his encreased, but mine did empaire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before which time I lov'd, as was my lot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That further mayd, hight Philtera the faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With whom a goodly doure I should have got,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And should have joyned bene to her in wedlocks knot.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Then did my younger brother, Amidas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Love that same other Damzell, Lucy bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom but little dowre allotted was:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her vertue was the dowre that did delight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What better dowre can to a dame be hight?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But now, when Philtra saw my lands decay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And former livelod fayle, she left me quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to my brother did ellope streight way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, taking her from me, his owne love left astray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"She, seeing then her selfe forsaken so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through dolorous despaire which she conceyved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the Sea her selfe did headlong throw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thinking to have her griefe by death bereaved:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But see how much her purpose was deceaved!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilest thus, amidst the billowes beating of her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Twixt life and death long to and fro she weaved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She chaunst unwares to light uppon this coffer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which to her in that daunger hope of life did offer.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"The wretched mayd, that earst desir'd to die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When as the paine of death she tasted had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And but halfe scene his ugly visnomie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan to repent that she had beene so mad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For any death to chaunge life, though most bad:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And catching hold of this Sea-beaten chest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(The lucky Pylot of her passage sad,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After long tossing in the seas distrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her weary barke at last uppon mine Isle did rest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Where I by chaunce then wandring on the shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did her espy, and through my good endevour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From dreadfull mouth of death, which threatned sore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her to have swallow'd up, did helpe to save her.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She then, in recompence of that great favour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which I on her bestowed, bestowed on me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The portion of that good which Fortune gave her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Together with her selfe in dowry free;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both goodly portions, but of both the better she.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Yet in this coffer which she with her brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great threasure sithence we did finde contained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which as our owne we tooke, and so it thought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But this same other Damzell since hath fained</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to her selfe that threasure appertained;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that she did transport the same by sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bring it to her husband new ordained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But suffred cruell shipwracke by the way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But whether it be so or no, I can not say.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But, whether it indeede be so or no,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This doe I say, that what so good or ill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or God or Fortune unto me did throw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not wronging any other by my will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I hold mine owne, and so will hold it still.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And though my land he first did winne away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then my love, (though now it little skill)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet my good lucke he shall not likewise pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I will it defend whilst ever that I may."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So having sayd, the younger did ensew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Full true it is what so about our land</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My brother here declared hath to you:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But not for it this ods twixt us doth stand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But for this threasure throwne uppon his strand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which well I prove, as shall appeare by triall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be this maides with whom I fastned hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Known by good markes and perfect good espiall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore it ought be rendred her without deniall."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When they thus ended had, the Knight began:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Certes, your strife were easie to accord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would ye remit it to some righteous man."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Unto yourselfe," said they, "we give our word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bide that judgement ye shall us afford."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Then for assurance to my doome to stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under my foote let each lay downe his sword;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then you shall my sentence understand."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So each of them layd downe his sword out of his hand.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then Artegall thus to the younger sayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Now tell me, Amidas, if that ye may,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your brothers land the which the sea hath layd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto your part, and pluckt from his away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By what good right doe you withhold this day?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"What other right," (quoth he) "should you esteeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that the sea it to my share did lay?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Your right is good," (sayd he) "and so I deeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That what the sea unto you sent your own should seeme."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then turning to the elder thus he sayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Now, Bracidas, let this likewise be showne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your brothers threasure, which from him is strayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being the dowry of his wife well knowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By what right doe you claime to be your owne?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"What other right," (quoth he) "should you esteeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that the sea hath it unto me throwne?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Your right is good," (sayd he) "and so I deeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That what the sea unto you sent your own should seeme.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"For equall right in equall things doth stand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For what the mighty Sea hath once possest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And plucked quite from all possessors hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether by rage of waves that never rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or else by wracke that wretches hath distrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He may dispose by his imperiall might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As thing at randon left, to whom he list.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So, Amidas, the land was yours first hight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so the threasure yours is, Bracidas, by right."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When he his sentence thus pronounced had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both Amidas and Philtra were displeased;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Bracidas and Lucy were right glad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on the threasure by that judgement seased.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So was their discord by this doome appeased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And each one had his right. Then Artegall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When as their sharpe contention he had ceased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Departed on his way, as did befall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To follow his old quest, the which him forth did call.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So as he travelled uppon the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He chaunst to come, where happily he spide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A rout of many people farre away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom his course he hastily applide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weete the cause of their assemblaunce wide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom when he approched neare in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(An uncouth sight) he plainely then descride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be a troupe of women, warlike dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With weapons in their hands as ready for to fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And in the midst of them he saw a Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With both his hands behinde him pinnoed hard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And round about his necke an halter tight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ready for the gallow-tree prepard:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His face was covered, and his head was bar'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That who he was uneath was to descry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with full heavy heart with them he far'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Griev'd to the soule, and groning inwardly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he of womens hands so base a death should dy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But they, like tyrants mercilesse, the more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rejoyced at his miserable case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him reviled, and reproched sore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With bitter taunts and termes of vile disgrace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now when as Artegall, arriv'd in place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did aske what cause brought that man to decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They round about him gan to swarme apace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Meaning on him their cruell hands to lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to have wrought unwares some villanous assay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But he was soone aware of their ill minde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And drawing backe deceived their intent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, though him selfe did shame on womankinde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mighty hand to shend, he Talus sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wrecke on them their follies hardyment:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who with few sowces of his yron flale</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dispersed all their troupe incontinent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sent them home to tell a piteous tale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of their vaine prowesse turned to their proper bale.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But that same wretched man, ordayned to die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They left behind them, glad to be so quit:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him Talus tooke out of perplexitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And horrour of fowle death for Knight unfit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who more then losse of life ydreaded it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, him restoring unto living light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So brought unto his Lord, where he did sit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beholding all that womanish weake fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom soone as he beheld he knew, and thus behight</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Sir Turpine! haplesse man, what make you here?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or have you lost your selfe and your discretion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ever in this wretched case ye were?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or have ye yeelded you to proude oppression</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of womens powre, that boast of mens subjection?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or else what other deadly dismall day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is falne on you by heavens hard direction</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ye were runne so fondly far astray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As for to lead your selfe unto your owne decay?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Much was the man confounded in his mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Partly with shame, and partly with dismay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all astonisht he him selfe did find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And little had for his excuse to say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But onely thus: "Most haplesse well ye may</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me justly terme, that to this shame am brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made the scorne of Knighthod this same day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But who can scape what his owne fate hath wrought?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The worke of heavens will surpasseth humaine thought."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Right true: but faulty men use oftentimes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To attribute their folly unto fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lay on heaven the guilt of their owne crimes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But tell, Sir Terpin, ne let you amate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your misery, how fell ye in this state?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Then sith ye needs" (quoth he) "will know my shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the ill which chaunst to me of late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I shortly will to you rehearse the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In hope ye will not turne misfortune to my blame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Being desirous (as all Knights are woont)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through hard adventures deedes of armes to try,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after fame and honour for to hunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I heard report that farre abrode did fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That a proud Amazon did late defy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All the brave Knights that hold of Maidenhead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto them wrought all the villany</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she could forge in her malicious head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which some hath put to shame, and many done be dead.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"The cause, they say, of this her cruell hate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is for the sake of Bellodant the bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom she bore most fervent love of late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wooed him by all the waies she could:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when she saw at last that he ne would</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ought or nought be wonne unto her will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She turn'd her love to hatred manifold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for his sake vow'd to doe all the ill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which she could doe to Knights; which now she doth fulfill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"For all those Knights, the which by force or guile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She doth subdue, she fowly doth entreate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First, she doth them of warlike armes despoile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cloth in womens weedes: And then with threat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth them compell to worke, to earne their meat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To spin, to card, to sew, to wash, to wring;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne doth she give them other thing to eat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But bread and water or like feeble thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Them to disable from revenge adventuring.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But if through stout disdaine of manly mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Any her proud observaunce will withstand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uppon that gibbet, which is there behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She causeth them be hang'd up out of hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which condition I right now did stand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, being overcome by her in fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And put to that base service of her band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I rather chose to die in lives despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then lead that shamefull life, unworthy of a Knight."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"How hight that Amazon?" (said Artegall)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"And where and how far hence does she abide?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Her name" (quoth he) "they Radigund doe call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Princesse of great powre and greater pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Queene of Amazons, in armes well tride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sundry battels, which she hath atchieved</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With great successe, that her hath glorifide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made her famous, more then is believed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne would I it have ween'd, had I not late it prieved."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Now sure," (said he) "and by the faith that I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Maydenhead and noble knighthood owe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I will not rest till I her might doe trie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And venge the shame that she to Knights doth show.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore, Sir Terpin, from you lightly throw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This squalid weede, the patterne of dispaire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wend with me, that ye may see and know</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How Fortune will your ruin'd name repaire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And knights of Maidenhead, whose praise she would empaire."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that, like one that hopelesse was depryv'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From deathes dore at which he lately lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those yron fetters wherewith he was gyv'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The badges of reproch, he threw away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And nimbly did him dight to guide the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the dwelling of that Amazone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which was from thence not past a mile or tway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A goodly citty and a mighty one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which, of her owne name, she called Radegone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Where they arriving by the watchman were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Descried streight; who all the city warned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How that three warlike persons did appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which the one him seem'd a Knight all armed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And th'other two well likely to have harmed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones the people all to harnesse ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And like a sort of Bees in clusters swarmed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere long their Queene her selfe, halfe like a man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came forth into the rout, and them t'array began.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now the Knights, being arrived neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did beat uppon the gates to enter in;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at the Porter, skorning them so few,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Threw many threats, if they the towne did win,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To teare his flesh in peeces for his sin:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when as Radigund there comming heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her heart for rage did grate, and teeth did grin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She bad that streight the gates should be unbard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to them way to make with weapons well prepard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as the gates were open to them set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They pressed forward, entraunce to have made;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in the middle way they were ymet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a sharpe showre of arrowes, which them staid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And better bad advise, ere they assaid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unknowen perill of bold womens pride.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then all that rout uppon them rudely laid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heaped strokes so fast on every side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And arrowes haild so thicke, that they could not abide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Radigund her selfe, when she espide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir Terpin, from her direfull doome acquit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So cruell doale amongst her maides divide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T'avenge that shame they did on him commit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All sodainely enflam'd with furious fit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like a fell Lionesse at him she flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on his head-peece him so fiercely smit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to the ground him quite she overthrew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dismayd so with the stroke that he no colours knew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as she saw him on the ground to grovell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She lightly to him leapt; and in his necke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her proud foote setting, at his head did levell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weening at once her wrath on him to wreake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his contempt, that did her judg'ment breake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As when a Beare hath seiz'd her cruell clawes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uppon the carkasse of some beast too weake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proudly stands over, and a while doth pause</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To heare the piteous beast pleading her plaintiffe cause.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when as Artegall in that distresse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By chaunce beheld, he left the bloudy slaughter</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which he swam, and ranne to his redresse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There her assayling fiercely fresh, he raught her</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such an huge stroke, that it of sence distraught her;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And had she not it warded warily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It had depriv'd her mother of a daughter:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nathlesse for all the powre she did apply</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It made her stagger oft, and stare with ghastly eye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like to an Eagle, in his kingly pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soring through his wide Empire of the aire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weather his brode sailes, by chaunce hath spide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Goshauke, which hath seized for her share</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uppon some fowle that should her feast prepare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With dreadfull force he flies at her bylive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with his souce, which none enduren dare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her from the quarrey he away doth drive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from her griping pounce the greedy prey doth rive.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, soone as she her sence recover'd had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She fiercely towards him her selfe gan dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through vengeful wrath and sdeignfull pride half mad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For never had she suffred such despight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But ere she could joyne hand with him to fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her warlike maides about her flockt so fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they disparted them, maugre their might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with their troupes did far asunder cast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But mongst the rest the fight did untill evening last.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And every while that mighty yron man</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his strange weapon, never wont in warre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them sorely vext, and courst, and overran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And broke their bowes, and did their shooting marre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none of all the many once did darre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him to assault, nor once approach him nie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But like a sort of sheepe dispersed farre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For dread of their devouring enemie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through all the fields and vallies did before him flie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when as dales faire shinie-beame, yclowded</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With fearefull shadowes of deformed night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Warn'd man and beast in quiet rest be shrowded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bold Radigund with sound of trumpe on hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Causd all her people to surcease from fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gathering them unto her citties gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made them all enter in before her sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the wounded, and the weake in state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be convayed in, ere she would once retrate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When thus the field was voided all away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all things quieted, the Elfin Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weary of toile and travell of that day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Causd his pavilion to be richly pight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before the city gate, in open sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where he him selfe did rest in safety</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Together with Sir Terpin all that night:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Talus usde, in times of jeopardy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To keepe a nightly watch for dread of treachery.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Radigund, full of heart-gnawing griefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the rebuke which she sustain'd that day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could take no rest, ne would receive reliefe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But tossed in her troublous minde what way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She mote revenge that blot which on her lay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There she resolv'd her selfe in single fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To try her Fortune, and his force assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rather then see her people spoiled quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As she had scene that day, a disaventerous sight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She called forth to her a trusty mayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom she thought fittest for that businesse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her name was Clarin, and thus to her sayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Goe, damzell, quickly, doe thy selfe addresse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To doe the message which I shall expresse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Goe thou unto that stranger Faery Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who yeester day drove us to such distresse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tell, that to morrow I with him wil fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And try in equall field whether hath greater might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But these conditions doe to him propound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That if I vanquishe him, he shall obay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My law, and ever to my lore be bound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so will I, if me he vanquish may,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What ever he shall like to doe or say.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Goe streight, and take with thee to witnesse it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sixe of thy fellowes of the best array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And beare with you both wine and juncates fit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bid him eate: henceforth he oft shall hungry sit."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Damzell streight obayd, and putting all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In readinesse, forth to the Towne-gate went;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where, sounding loud a Trumpet from the wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto those warlike Knights she warning sent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Talus forth issuing from the tent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the wall his way did fearelesse take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weeten what that trumpets sounding ment:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where that same Damzell lowdly him bespake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shew'd that with his Lord she would emparlaunce make.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So he them streight conduaed to his Lord;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, as he could, them goodly well did greete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till they had told their message word by word:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he accepting well, as he could weete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them fairely entertaynd with curt'sies meete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gave them gifts and things of deare delight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So backe againe they homeward turnd their feete;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Artegall him selfe to rest did dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he mote fresher be against the next daies fight.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-5" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Artegall fights with Radigund,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And is subdewed by guile:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He is by her emprisoned,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">But wrought by Clarins wile.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>So soone as day forth dawning from the East</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nights humid curtaine from the heavens withdrew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And earely calling forth both man and beast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Comaunded them their daily workes renew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These noble warriors, mindefull to pursew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The last daies purpose of their vowed fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them selves thereto preparde in order dew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Knight, as best was seeming for a Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And th'Amazon, as best it likt her selfe to dight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All in a Camis light of purple silke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Woven uppon with silver, subtly wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And quilted uppon sattin white as milke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Trayled with ribbands diversly distraught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as the workeman had their courses taught;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which was short tucked for light motion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Up to her ham; but, when she list, it raught</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Downe to her lowest heele; and thereuppon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She wore for her defence a mayled habergeon.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And on her legs she painted buskins wore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Basted with bends of gold on every side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mailes betweene, and laced close afore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uppon her thigh her Cemitare was tide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With an embrodered belt of mickell pride;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on her shoulder hung her shield, bedeckt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uppon the bosse with stones that shined wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As the faire Moone in her most full aspect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That to the Moone it mote be like in each respect:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So forth she came out of the citty gate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With stately port and proud magnificence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Guarded with many Damzels that diu waite</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uppon her person for her sure defence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Playing on shaumes and trumpets, that from hence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their sound did reach unto the heavens hight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So forth into the field she marched thence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where was a rich Pavilion ready pight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her to receive, till time they should begin the fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then forth came Artegall out of his tent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All arm'd to point, and first the Lists did enter:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone after eke came she, with fell intent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And countenaunce fierce, as having fully bent her</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That battells utmost triall to adventer.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Lists were closed fast, to barrc the rout</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From rudely pressing to the middle center;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which in great heapes them circled all about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wayting how Fortune would resolve that daungerous dout.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Trumpets sounded, and the field began;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With bitter strokes it both began and ended.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She at the first encounter on him ran</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With furious rage, as if she had intended</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of his breast the very heart have rended:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he, that had like tempests often tride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From that first flaw him selfe right well defended.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The more she rag'd, the more he did abide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She hewd, she foynd, she lasht, she laid on every side.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet still her blowes he bore, and her forbore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weening at last to win advantage new;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet still her crueltie increased more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, though powre faild, her courage did accrew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which fayling, he gan fiercely her pursew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as a Smith that to his cunning feat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The stubborne mettall seeketh to subdew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone as he feeles it mollifide with heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With his great yron sledge doth strongly on it beat.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So did Sir Artegall upon her lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if she had an yron andvile beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That flakes of fire, bright as the sunny ray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of her steely armes were flashing scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all on fire ye would her surely weene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with her shield so well her selfe she warded</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the dread daunger of his weapon keene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all that while her life she safely garded;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he that helpe from her against her will discarded.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For with his trenchant blade at the next blow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Halfe of her shield he shared quite away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That halfe her side it selfe did naked show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thenceforth unto daunger opened way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much was she moved with the mightie sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that sad stroke, that halfe enrag'd she grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, like a greedie Beare unto her pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With her sharpe Cemitare at him she flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That glauncing downe his thigh the purple bloud forth drew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereat she gan to triumph with great boast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to upbrayd that chaunce which him misfell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if the prize she gotten had almost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With spightfull speaches, fitting with her well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That his great hart gan inwardly to swell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With indignation at her vaunting vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at her strooke with puissaunce fearefull fell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet with her shield she warded it againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That shattered all to peeces round about the plaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Having her thus disarmed of her shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon her helmet he againe her strooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That downe she fell upon the grassie field</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In sencelesse swoune, as if her life forsooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pangs of death her spirit overtooke.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when he saw before his foote prostrated,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He to her lept with deadly dreadfull looke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her sunshynie helmet soone unlaced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thinking at once both head and helmet to have raced.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, when as he discovered had her face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He saw, his senses straunge astonishment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A miracle of natures goodly grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In her faire visage voide of ornament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But bath'd in bloud and sweat together ment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which in the rudenesse of that evill plight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bewrayd the signes of feature excellent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as the Moone in foggie winters night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth seeme to be her selfe, though darkned be her light.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At sight thereof his cruell minded hart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Empierced was with pittifull regard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That his sharpe sword he threw from him apart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cursing his hand that had that visage mard:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No hand so cruell, nor no hart so hard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But ruth of beautie will it mollifie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By this, upstarting from her swoune, she star'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A while about her with confused eye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like one that from his dreame is waked suddenlye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as the knight she there by her did spy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Standing with emptie hands all weaponlesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With fresh assault upon him she did fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gan renew her former cruelnesse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And though he still retyr'd, yet nathelesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With huge redoubled strokes she on him layd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And more increast her outrage mercilesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The more that he with meeke intreatie prayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her wrathful hand from greedy vengeance to have stayd,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like as a Puttocke having spyde in sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A gentle Faulcon sitting on an hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose other wing, now made unmeete for flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was lately broken by some fortune ill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The foolish Kyte, led with licentious will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth beat upon the gentle bird in vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With many idle stoups her troubling still:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even so did Radigund with bootlesse paine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Annoy this noble Knight, and sorely him constraine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nought could he do but shun the dred despight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her fierce wrath, and backward still retyre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his single shield, well as he might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beare off the burden of her raging yre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evermore he gently did desyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To stay Her stroks, and he himselfe would yield;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet nould she hearke, ne let him once respyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till he to her delivered had his shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to her mercie him submitted in plaine field.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So was he overcome; not overcome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to her yeelded of his owne accord;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was he justly damned by the doome</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his owne mouth, that spake so warelesse word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be her thrall and service her afford:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For though that he first victorie obtayned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet after, by abandoning his sword,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He wilfull lost that he before attayned:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No fayrer conquest then that with goodwill is gayned.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho with her sword on him she flatling strooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In signe of true subjection to her powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as her vassall him to thraldome tooke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Terpine, borne to' a more unhappy howre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he on whom the lucklesse stars did lowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She caused to be attacht, and forthwith led</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the crooke, t'abide the balefull stowre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From which he lately had through reskew fled:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where he full shamefully was hanged by the hed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when they thought on Talus hands to lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He with his yron flaile amongst them thondred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they were fayne to let him scape away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Glad from his companie to be so sondred;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose presence all their troups so much encombred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That th' heapes of those which he did wound and slay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besides the rest dismayd, might not be nombred:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet all that while he would not once assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To reskew his owne Lord, but thought it just t'obay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then tooke the Amazon this noble knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Left to her will by his owne wilfull blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And caused him to be disarmed quight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the ornaments of knightly name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which whylome he gotten had great fame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Instead whereof she made him to be dight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In womans weedes, that is to manhood shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And put before his lap a napron white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Instead of Curiets and bases fit for fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So being clad she brought him from the field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which he had bene trayned many a day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into a long large chamber, which was sield</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With moniments of many Knights decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By her subdewed in victorious fray:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst the which she causd his warlike armes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be hang'd on high, that mote his shame bewray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And broke his sword, for feare of further harmes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With which he wont to stirre up battailous alarmes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There entred in he round about him saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Many brave knights, whose names right well he knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There bound t'obay that Amazons proud law,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spinning and carding all in comely rew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That his bigge hart loth'd so uncomely vew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But they were forst, through penurie and pyne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To doe those workes to them appointed dew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For nought was given them to sup or dyne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But what their hands could earne by twisting linnen twyne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Amongst them all she placed him most low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his hand a distaffe to him gave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he thereon should spin both flax and tow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A sordid office for a mind so brave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So hard it is to be a womans slave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet he it tooke in his owne selfes despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thereto did himselfe right well behave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her to obay, sith he his faith had plight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her vassall to become, if she him wonne in fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who had him scene imagine mote thereby</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That whylome hath of Hercules bene told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How for lolas sake he did apply</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mightie hands the distaffe vile to hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For his huge club, which had subdew'd of old</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So many monsters which the world annoyed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His Lyons skin chaungd to a pall of gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which, forgetting warres, he onely joyed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In combats of sweet love, and with his mistresse toyed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such is the crueltie of womenkynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When they have shaken off the shamefast band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which wise Nature did them strongly bynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T'obay the heasts of mans well-ruling hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That then all rule and reason they withstand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To purchase a licentious libertie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But vertuous women wisely understand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they were borne to base humilitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unlesse the heavens them lift to lawfull soveraintie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus there long while continu'd Artegall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Serving proud Radigund with true subjection,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How ever it his noble heart did gall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T'obay a womans tyrannous direction,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That might have had of life or death election:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, having chosen, now he might not chaunge.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">During which time the warlike Amazon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose wandring fancie after lust did raunge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gan cast a secret liking to this captive straunge.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which long concealing in her covert brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She chaw'd the cud of lovers carefull plight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet could it not so thoroughly digest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being fast fixed in her wounded spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But it tormented her both day and night:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet would she not thereto yeeld free accord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To serve the lowly vassall of her might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of her servant make her soverayne Lord:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So great her pride that she such basenesse much abhord.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So much the greater still her anguish grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through stubborne handling of her love-sicke hart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And still the more she strove it to subdew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The more she still augmented her owne smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wyder made the wound of th' hidden dart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last, when long she struggled had in vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She gan to stoupe, and her proud mind convert</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To meeke obeysance of loves mightie raine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And him entreat for grace that had procur'd her paine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Unto her selfe in secret she did call</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her nearest handmayd, whom she most did trust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to her said: "Clarinda, whom of all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I trust alive, sith I thee fostred first,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now is the time that I untimely must</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereof make tryall in my greatest need.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It is so hapned that the heavens unjust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spighting my happie freedome, have agreed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thrall my looser life, or my last bale to breed."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that she turn'd her head, as halfe abashed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hide the blush which in her visage rose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through her eyes like sudden lightning flashed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Decking her cheeke with a vermilion rose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But soone she did her countenance compose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to her turning thus began againe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"This griefes deepe wound I would to thee disclose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereto compelled through hart-murdring paine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But dread of shame my doubtfull lips doth still restraine."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ah! my deare dread," (said then the faithfull Mayd)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Can dread of ought your dreadlesse hart withhold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That many hath with dread of death dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dare even deathes most dreadfull face behold?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Say on, my soverayne Ladie, and be bold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth not your handmayds life at your foot lie?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith much comforted she gan unfold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cause of her conceived maladie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As one that would confesse, yet faine would it denie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Clarin," (said she) "thou seest yond Fayry Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom not my valour, but his owne brave mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Subjected hath to my unequall might.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What right is it, that he should thraldome find</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For lending life to me, a wretch unkind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That for such good him recompence with ill?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore I cast how I may him unbind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by his freedome get his free goodwill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet so, as bound to me he may continue still:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Bound unto me but not with such hard bands</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of strong compulsion and streight violence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As now in miserable state he stands;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with sweet love and sure benevolence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Voide of malitious mind or foule offence:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which if thou canst win him any way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without discoverie of my thoughts pretence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both goodly meede of him it purchase may,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke with gratefull service me right well apay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Which that thou mayst the better bring to pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Loe! here this ring, which shall thy warrant bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And token true to old Eumenias,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From time to time, when thou it best shah see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in and out thou mayst have passage free.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Goe now, Clarinda; well thy wits advise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all thy forces gather unto thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Armies of lovely lookes, and speeches wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With which thou canst even Jove himselfe to love entise."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The trustie Mayd, conceiving her intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did with sure promise of her good endevour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Give her great comfort and some harts content.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So, from her parting, she thenceforth did labour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By all the meanes she might to curry favour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With th' Elfin Knight, her Ladies best beloved:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With daily shew of courteous kind behaviour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even at the marke-white of his hart she roved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with wide-glauncing words one day she thus him proved.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Unhappie Knight! upon whose hopelesse state</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fortune, envying good, hath felly frowned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cruell heavens have heapt an heavy fate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I rew that thus thy better dayes are drowned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In sad despaire, and all thy senses swowned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In stupid sorow, sith thy juster merit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might else have with felicitie bene crowned:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Looke up at last, and wake thy dulled spirit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thinke how this long death thou mightest disinherit."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Much did he marvell at her uncouth speach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose hidden drift he could not well perceive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gan to doubt least she him sought t'appeach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of treason, or some guilefull traine did weave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through which she might his wretched life bereave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both which to barre he with this answere met her:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Faire Damzell, that with ruth (as I perceave)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of my mishaps art mov'd to wish me better,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For such your kind regard I can but rest your detter.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Yet, weet ye well, that to a courage great</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It is no lesse beseeming well to beare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The storme of fortunes frowne or heavens threat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then in the sunshine of her countenance cleare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Timely to joy and carrie comely cheare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For though this cloud have now me overcast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet doe I not of better times despeyre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And though (unlike) they should for ever last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet in my truthes assurance I rest fixed fast."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But what so stonie minde," (she then replyde)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"But if in his owne powre occasion lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would to his hope a windowe open wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to his fortunes helpe make readie way?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Unworthy sure" (quoth he) "of better day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That will not take the offer of good hope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke pursew, if he attaine it may."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which speaches she applying to the scope</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of her intent, this further purpose to him shope.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Then why doest not, thou ill advized man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Make meanes to win thy libertie forlorne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And try if thou by faire entreatie can</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Move Radigund? who, though she still have worne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her dayes in warre, yet (weet thou) was not borne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Beares and Tygres, nor so salvage mynded</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As that, albe all love of men she scorne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She yet forgets that she of men was kynded:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sooth oft scene, that proudest harts base love hath blynded."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Certes, Clarinda, not of cancred will,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Sayd he) "nor obstinate disdainefull mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I have forbore this duetie to fulfill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For well I may this weene by that I fynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she a Queene, and come of Princely kynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both worthie is for to be sewd unto,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Chiefely by him whose life her law doth bynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke of powre her owne doome to undo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And als' of princely grace to be inclyn'd thereto.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But want of meanes hath bene mine onely let</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From seeking favour where it doth abound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which if I might by your good office get,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I to your selfe should rest for ever bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And readie to deserve what grace I found."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She feeling him thus bite upon the bayt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet doubting least his hold was but unsound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And not well fastened, would not strike him strayt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But drew him on with hope fit leasure to awayt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, foolish Mayd! whyles heedlesse of the hooke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She thus oft times was beating off and on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through slipperie footing fell into the brooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there was caught to her confusion:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, seeking thus to salve the Amazon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She wounded was with her deceipts owne dart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gan thenceforth to cast affection,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Conceived close in her beguiled hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Artegall, through pittie of his causelesse smart.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet durst she not disclose her fancies wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne to himselfe, for doubt of being sdayned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne yet to any other wight on ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For feare her mistresse shold have knowledge gayned;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to her selfe it secretly retayned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within the closet of her covert brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The more thereby her tender hart was payned;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet to awayt fit time she weened best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fairely did dissemble her sad thoughts unrest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One day her Ladle, calling her apart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan to demaund of her some tydings good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Touching her loves successe, her lingring smart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith she gan at first to change her mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one adaw'd, and halfe confused stood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But quickly she it overpast, so soone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As she her face had wypt to fresh her blood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho gan she tell her all that she had donne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the wayes she sought his love for to have wonne</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But sayd that he was obstinate and sterne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Scorning her offers and conditions vaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne would be taught with any termes to lerne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So fond a lesson as to love againe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Die rather would he in penurious paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his abridged dayes in dolour wast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then his foes love or liking entertaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His resolution was, both first and last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His bodie was her thrall, his hart was freely plast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when the cruell Amazon perceived,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She gan to storme, and rage, and rend her gall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For very fell despight which she conceived,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be so scorned of a base-borne thrall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose life did lie in her least eye-lids fall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which she vow'd, with many a cursed threat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she therefore would him ere long forstall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nathlesse, when calmed was her furious heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She chang'd that threatfull mood, and mildly gan entreat</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"What now is left, Clarinda? what remaines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That we may compasse this our enterprize?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great shame to lose so long employed paines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And greater shame t'abide so great misprize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which he dares our offers thus despize:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet that his guilt the greater may appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And more my gratious mercie by this wize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I will a while with his first folly beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till thou have tride againe, and tempted him more neare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Say and do all that may thereto prevaile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Leave nought unpromist that may him perswade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Life, freedome, grace, and gifts of great availe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which the Gods themselves are mylder made:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereto adde art, even womens witty trade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The art of mightie words that men can charme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which in case thou canst him not invade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let him feele hardnesse of thy heavie arme:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who will not stoupe with good shall be made stoupe with harme.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Some of his diet doe from him withdraw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For I him find to be too proudly fed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Give him more labour, and with streighter law,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he with worke may be forwearied:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let him lodge hard, and lie in strawen bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That may pull downe the courage of his pride;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lay upon him, for his greater dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cold yron chaines with which let him be tide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let what ever he desires be him denide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"When thou hast all this doen, then bring me newes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his demeane: thenceforth not like a lover,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But like a rebell stout, I will him use;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For I resolve this siege not to give over,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till I the conquest of my will recover."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So she departed full of griefe and sdaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which inly did to great impatience move her:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the false mayden shortly turn'd againe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the prison, where her hart did thrall remaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There all her subtill nets she did unfold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the engins of her wit display;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which she meant him warelesse to enfold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of his innocence to make her pray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So cunningly she wrought her crafts assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That both her Ladie, and her selfe withall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the knight attonce she did betray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But most the knight, whom she with guilefull call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did cast for to allure into her trap to fall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As a bad Nurse, which, fayning to receive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In her owne mouth the food ment for her chyld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withholdes it to her selfe, and doeth deceive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The infant, so for want of nourture spoyld;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even so Clarinda her owne Dame beguyld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And turn'd the trust which was in her affyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To feeding of her private fire, which boyld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her inward brest, and in her entrayles fryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The more that she it sought to cover and to hyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For, comming to this knight, she purpose fayned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How earnest suit she earst for him had made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto her Queene, his freedome to have gayned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by no meanes could her thereto perswade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that instead thereof she sternely bade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His miserie to be augmented more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many yron bands on him to lade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which nathlesse she for his love forebore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So praying him t'accept her service evermore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, more then that, she promist that she would,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In case she might finde favour in his eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Devize how to enlarge him out of hould.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Fayrie, glad to gaine his libertie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can yeeld great thankes for such her curtesie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with faire words, fit for the time and place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To feede the humour of her maladie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Promist, if she would free him from that case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He wold, by all good means he might, deserve such grace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So daily he faire semblant did her shew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet never meant he in his noble mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To his owne absent love to be untrew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever did deceiptfull Clarin find</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In her false hart his bondage to unbind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But rather how she mote him faster tye.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore unto her mistresse most unkind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She daily told her love he did defye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And him she told her Dame his freedome did denye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet thus much friendship she to him did show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That his scarse diet somewhat was amended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his worke lessened, that his love mote grow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet to her Dame him still she discommended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she with him mote be the more offended.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus he long while in thraldome there remayned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of both beloved well, but litle frended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill his owne true love his freedome gayned:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which in an other Canto will be best contayned.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-6" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Talus brings newes to Britomart</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of Artegals mishap:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She goes to seeke him; Dolon meets,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Who seekes her to entrap.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Some men, I wote, will deeme in Artegall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great weaknesse, and report of him much ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For yeelding so himselfe a wretched thrall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To th'insolent commaund of womens will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all his former praise doth fowly spill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he the man, that say or doe so dare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be well adviz'd that he stand stedfast still;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For never yet was wight so well aware,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he, at first or last, was trapt in womens snare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet in the streightnesse of that captive state</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This gentle knight himselfe so well behaved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That notwithstanding all the subtill bait</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which those Amazons his love still craved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To his owne love his loialtie he saved:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose character in th'Adamantine mould</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his true hart so firmely was engraved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That no new loves impression ever could</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bereave it thence: such blot his honour blemish should.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet his owne love, the noble Britomart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Scarse so conceived in her jealous thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What time sad tydings of his balefull smart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In womans bondage Talus to her brought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Brought in untimely houre, ere it was sought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, after that the utmost date assynde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For his returne she waited had for nought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She gan to cast in her misdoubtfull mynde</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thousand feares, that love-sicke fancies faine to fynde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sometime she feared least some hard mishap</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had him misfalne in his adventurous quest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometime least his false foe did him entrap</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In traytrous traine, or had unwares opprest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But most she did her troubled mynd molest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And secretly afflict with jealous feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least some new love had him from her possest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet loth she was, since she no ill did heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thinke of him so ill; yet could she not forbeare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One while she blam'd her selfe; another whyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She him condemn'd as trustlesse and untrew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then, her griefe with errour to beguyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She fayn'd to count the time againe anew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if before she had not counted trew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For houres, but daycs; for weekes that passed were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She told but moneths, to make them seeme more few;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet when she reckned them, still drawing nearc,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each hour did seeme a moneth, and every moneth a yeare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when as yet she saw him not returne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She thought to send some one to seeke him out;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But none she found so fit to serve that turne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As her owne selfe, to ease her selfe of dout.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now she deviz'd, amongst the warlike rout</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of errant Knights, to seeke her errant Knight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then againe resolv'd to hunt him out</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst loose Ladies lapped in delight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then both Knights envide, and Ladies eke did spight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One day when as she long had sought for ease</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In every place, and every place thought best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet found no place that could her liking please,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She to a window came that opened West,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Towards which coast her love his way addrest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There looking forth, shee in her heart did find</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Many vaine fancies working her unrest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sent her winged thoughts, more swift then wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To beare unto her love the message of her mind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There as she looked long, at last she spide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One comming towards her with hasty speede.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well weend she then, ere him she plaine descride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it was one sent from her love indeede;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who when he nigh approcht, shee mote arede</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it was Talus, Artegall his groome:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat her heart was fild with hope and drede;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne would she stay till he in place could come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ran to meete him forth to know his tidings somme.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Even in the done him meeting, she begun:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"And where is he thy Lord, and how far hence?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Declare at once: and hath he lost or wun?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The yron man, albe he wanted sence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sorrowes feeling, yet, with conscience</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his ill newes, did inly chill and quake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stood still mute, as one in great suspence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if that by his silence he would make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her rather reade his meaning then him selfe it spake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Till she againe thus sayd: "Talus, be bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tell what ever it be, good or bad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from thy tongue thy hearts intent doth hold."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom he thus at length: "The tidings sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I would hide, will needs, I see, be rad.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Lord, your love, by hard mishap doth lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In wretched bondage, wofully bestad."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ay me," (quoth she) "what wicked destinie!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And is he vanquisht by his tyrant enemy?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Not by that Tyrant, his intended foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by a Tyrantesse," (he then replide)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"That him captived hath in haplesse woe."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Cease, thou bad newes-man! badly doest thou hide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy maisters shame, in harlots bondage tide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rest my selfe too readily can spell."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that in rage she turn'd from him aside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forcing in vaine the rest to her to tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to her chamber went like solitary cell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There she began to make her monefull plaint</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against her Knight for being so untrew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him to touch with falshoods fowle attaint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all his other honour overthrew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oft did she blame her selfe, and often rew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For yeelding to a straungers love so light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose life and manners straunge she never knew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evermore she did him sharpely twight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For breach of faith to her, which he had firmely plight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And then she in her wrathfull will did cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How to revenge that blot of honour blent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To fight with him, and goodly die her last:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then againe she did her selfe torment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Inflidting on her selfe his punishment.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A while she walkt, and chauft; a while she threw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her selfe uppon her bed, and did lament:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet did she not lament with loude alew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As women wont, but with deepe sighes and singults few.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like as a wayward childe, whose sounder sleepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is broken with some fearefull dreames affright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With froward will doth set him selfe to weepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne can be stild for all his nurses might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But kicks, and squals, and shriekes for fell despight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now scratching her, and her loose locks misusing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now seeking darkenesse, and now seeking light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then craving sucke, and then the sucke refusing:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such was this Ladies fit in her loves fond accusing.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when she had with such unquiet fits</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her selfe there close afflicted long in vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet found no easement in her troubled wits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She unto Talus forth return'd againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By change of place seeking to ease her paine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gan enquire of him with mylder mood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The certaine cause of Artegals detaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And what he did, and in what state he stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And whether he did woo, or whether he were woo'd?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ah wellaway!" (sayd then the yron man)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"That he is not the while in state to woo;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But lies in wretched thraldome, weake and wan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not by strong hand compelled thereunto,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But his owne doome, that none can now undoo."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Sayd I not then" (quoth shee), "erwhile aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That this is things compare betwixt you two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me to deceive of faith unto me plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since that he was not forst, nor overcome in fight?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that he gan at large to her dilate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whole discourse of his captivance sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In sort as ye have heard the same of late:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which when she with hard enduraunce had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Heard to the end, she was right sore bestad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sodaine stounds of wrath and griefe attone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne would abide, till she had aunswere made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But streight her selfe did dight, and armor don,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mounting to her steede bad Talus guide her on.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So forth she rode uppon her ready way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke her Knight, as Talus her did guide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sadly she rode, and never word did say</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor good nor bad, ne ever lookt aside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But still right downe; and in her thought did hide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The felnesse of her heart, right fully bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To fierce avengement of that womans pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which had her Lord in her base prison pent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so great honour with so fowle reproch had blent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So as she thus melancholicke did ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Chawing the cud of griefe and inward paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She chaunst to meete, toward the even-tide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Knight that softly paced on the plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if him selfe to solace he were faine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well shot in yeares he seem'd, and rather bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To peace then needlesse trouble to constraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As well by view of that his vestiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As by his modest semblant that no evill ment.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He comming neare gan gently her salute</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With curteous words, in the most comely wize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who though desirous rather to rest mute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then termes to entertaine of common guize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet rather then she kindnesse would despize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She would her selfe displease; so him requite.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan the other further to devize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of things abrode, as next to hand did light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many things demaund, to which she answer'd light.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For little lust had she to talkc of ought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ought to heare that mote delightfull bee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her minde was whole possessed of one thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That gave none other place. Which when as hee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By outward signes (as well he might) did see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He list no lenger to use lothfull speach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But her besought to take it well in gree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith shady dampe had dimd the heavens reach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To lodge with him that night, unles good cause empeach.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Championesse, now seeing night at dore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was glad to yeeld unto his good request,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with him went without gaine-saying more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not farre away, but little wide by West,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His dwelling was, to which he him addrest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where soone arriving they received were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In seemely wise, as them beseemed best;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he, their host, them goodly well did chearc,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And talk't of pleasant things the night away to weare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus passing th'evening well, till time of rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Britomart unto a bowre was brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where groomes awayted her to have undrest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she ne would undressed be for ought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne doffe her armes, though he her much besought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she had vow'd, she sayd, not to forgo</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those warlike weedes, till she revenge had wrought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of a late wrong uppon a mortall foe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which she would sure performe, betide her wele or wo.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when their Host perceiv'd, right discontent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In minde he grew, for feare least by that art</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He should his purpose misse, which close he ment:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet taking leave of her he did depart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There all that night remained Britomart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Restlesse, recomfortlesse, with heart deepe grieved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor suffering the least twinckling sleepe to start</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into her eye, which th' heart mote have relieved;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if the least appear'd, her eyes she streight reprieved:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ye guilty eyes," (sayd she) "the which with guyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My heart at first betrayd, will ye betray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My life now too, for which a little whyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye will not watch? false watches, wellaway!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I wote when ye did watch both night and day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto your losse; and now needes will ye sleepe?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now ye have made my heart to wake alway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now will ye sleepe? ah! wake, and rather weepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thinke of your night's want, that should yee waking keepe."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus did she watch, and weare the weary night</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In waylfull plaints that none was to appease;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now walking soft, now sitting still upright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As sundry chaunge her seemed best to ease.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne lesse did Talus suffer sleepe to seaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His eye-lids sad, but watcht continually,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lying without her dore in great disease:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to a Spaniell wayting carefully</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Least any should betray his Lady treacherously.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>What time the native Belman of the night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bird that warned Peter of his fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First rings his silver Bell t'each sleepy wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That should their mindes up to devotion call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She heard a wondrous noise below the hall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All sodainely the bed, where she should lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By a false trap was let adowne to fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into a lower roome, and by and by</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The loft was raysd againe, that no man could it spie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With sight whereof she was dismayd right sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perceiving well the treason which was ment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet stirred not at all for doubt of more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But kept her place with courage confident,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wayting what would ensue of that event.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It was not long before she heard the sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of armed men comming with close intent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Towards her chamber; at which dreadfull stound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She quickly caught her sword, and shield about her bound,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that there came unto her chamber dore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two Knights all armed ready for to fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after them full many other more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A raskall rout, with weapons rudely dight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom soone as Talus spide by glims of night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He started up, there where on ground he lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his hand his thresher ready keight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They seeing that let drive at him streightway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And round about him preace in riotous aray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, soone as he began to lay about</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his rude yron flaile, they gan to flie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both armed Knights and eke unarmed rout;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet Talus after them apace did plie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where ever in the darke he could them spie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That here and there like scattred sheepe they lay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, backe returning where his Dame did lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He to her told the story of that fray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all that treason there intended did bewray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Wherewith though wondrous wroth, and inly burning</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be avenged for so fowle a deede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet being forst to abide the daies returning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She there remain'd; but with right wary heede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least any more such practise should proceede.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now mote ye know (that which to Britomart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unknowen was) whence all this did proceede;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for what cause so great mischievous smart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was meant to her that never evill ment in hart.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The goodman of this house was Dolon hight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A man of subtill wit and wicked minde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That whilome in his youth had bene a Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And armes had borne, but little good could finde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And much lesse honour by that warlike kinde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of life: for he was nothing valorous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with slie shiftes and wiles did underminde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All noble Knights, which were adventurous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many brought to shame by treason treacherous.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He had three sonnes, all three like fathers sonnes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like treacherous, like full of fraud and guile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all that on this earthly compasse wonnes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The eldest of the which was slaine erewhile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By Artegall, through his owne guilty wile:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His name was Guizor; whose untimely fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For to avenge, full many treasons vile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His father Dolon had deviz'd of late</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With these his wicked sons, and shewd his cankred hate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For sure he weend that this his present guest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was Artegall, by many tokens plaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But chiefly by that yron page he ghest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which still was wont with Artegall remaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therefore ment him surely to have slaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by Gods grace, and her good heedinesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She was preserved from their traytrous traine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus she all night wore out in watchfulnesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne suffred slothfull sleepe her eyelids to oppresse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The morrow next, so soone as dawning houre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Discovered had the light to living eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She forth yssew'd out of her loathed bowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With full intent t'avenge that villany</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On that vilde man and all his family;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, comming down to seeke them where they wond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor sire, nor sonnes, not any could she spie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each rowme she sought, but them all empty fond.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They all were fled for feare; but whether, nether kond.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She saw it vaine to make there lenger stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But tooke her steede; and thereon mounting light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan her addresse unto her former way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She had not rid the mountenance of a flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that she saw there present in her sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those two false brethren on that perillous Bridge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which Pollente with Artegall did fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Streight was the passage, like a ploughed ridge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, if two met, the one mote needes fall over the lidge.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There they did thinke them selves on her to wreake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who as she nigh unto them drew, the one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These vile reproches gan unto her speake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Thou recreant false traytor, that with lone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of armes hast knighthood stolne, yet Knight art none,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No more shall now the darkenesse of the night</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Defend thee from the vengeance of thy fone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with thy bloud thou shalt appease the spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Guizor by thee slaine, and murdred by thy slight."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Strange were the words in Britomartis eare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet stayd she not for them, but forward fared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till to the perillous Bridge she came; and there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Talus desir'd that he might have prepared</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The way to her, and those two losels scared;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she thereat was wroth, that for despight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The glauncing sparkles through her bever glared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from her eies did flash out fiery light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like coles that through a silver Censer sparkle bright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She stayd not to advise which way to take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But putting spurres unto her fiery beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thorough the midst of them she way did make.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The one of them, which most her wrath increast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uppon her speare she bore before her breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till to the Bridges further end she past;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where falling downe his challenge he releast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other over side the Bridge she cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the river, where he drunke his deadly last.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when the flashing Levin haps to light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uppon two stubborne oakes, which stand so neare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That way betwixt them none appeares in sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Engin, fiercely flying forth, doth teare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th'one from the earth, and through the aire doth beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other it with force doth overthrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uppon one side, and from his rootes doth reare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So did the Championesse those two there strow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to their sire their carcasses left to bestow.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-7" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Britomart comes to Isis Church,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Where shee strange visions sees:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She fights with Radigund, her slaies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And Artegall thence frees.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Nought is on earth more sacred or divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Gods and men doe equally adore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then this same vertue that doth right define:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For th'hevens themselves, whence mortal men implore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right in their wrongs, are rul'd by righteous lore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of highest Jove, who doth true justice deale</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To his inferiour Gods, and evermore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith containes his heavenly Common-weale:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The skill whereof to Princes hearts he doth reveale.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Well therefore did the antique world invent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Justice was a God of soveraine grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And altars unto him and temples lent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heavenly honours in the highest place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Calling him great Osyris, of the race</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of th'old Egyptian Kings that whylome were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With fayned colours shading a true case;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that Osyris, whilest he lived here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The justest man alive and truest did appeare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His wife was Isis; whom they likewise made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Goddesse of great powre and soverainty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in her person cunningly did shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That part of Justice which is Equity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof I have to treat here presently:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto whose temple when as Britomart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arrived, shee with great humility</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did enter in, ne would that night depart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Talus mote not be admitted to her part.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There she received was in goodly wize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of many Priests, which duely did attend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uppon the rites and daily sacrifize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All clad in linnen robes with silver hemd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on their heads, with long locks comely kemd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They wore rich Mitres shaped like the Moone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To shew that Isis doth the Moone portend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as Osyris signifies the Sunne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that they both like race in equall justice runne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Championesse them greeting, as she could,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was thence by them into the Temple led;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose goodly building when she did behould,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Borne uppon stately pillours, all dispred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With shining gold, and arched over hed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She wondred at the workemans passing skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose like before she never saw nor red;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thereuppon long while stood gazing still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thought that she thereon could never gaze her fill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thence forth unto the Idoll they her brought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which was framed all of silver fine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So well as could with cunning hand be wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And clothed all in garments made of line,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hemd all about with fringe of silver twine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uppon her head she wore a Crowne of gold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To shew that she had powre in things divine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at her feete a Crocodile was rold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That with her wreathed taile her middle did enfold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One foote was set uppon the Crocodile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on the ground the other fast did stand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So meaning to suppresse both forged guile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And open force: and in her other hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She stretched forth a long white sclender wand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such was the Goddesse; whom when Britomart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had long beheld, her selfe uppon the land</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She did prostrate, and with right humble hart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto her selfe her silent prayers did impart.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To which the Idoll, as it were inclining,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her wand did move with amiable looke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By outward shew her inward sence desining:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who well perceiving how her wand she shooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It as a token of good fortune tooke.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By this the day with dampe was overcast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And joyous light the house of Jove forsooke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when she saw her helmet she unlaste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by the altars side her selfe to slumber plaste.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For other beds the Priests there used none,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But on their mother Earths deare lap did lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bake their sides uppon the cold hard stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T'enure them selves to sufferaunce thereby,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And proud rebellious flesh to mortify:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For by the vow of their religion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They tied were to stedfast chastity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And continence of life, that, all forgon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They mote the better tend to their devotion.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therefore they mote not taste of fleshly food,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne feed on ought the which doth bloud containe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne drinke of wine; for wine, they say, is blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even the bloud of Gyants, which were slaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By thundring Jove in the Phlegrean plaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which the earth (as they the story tell)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wroth with the Gods, which to perpetuall paine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had damn'd her sonnes which gainst them did rebell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With inward griefe and malice did against them swell:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And of their vitall bloud, the which was shed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into her pregnant bosome, forth she brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fruitfull vine; whose liquor blouddy red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having the mindes of men with fury fraught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mote in them stirre up old rebellious thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make new warre against the Gods againe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such is the powre of that same fruit, that nought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fell contagion may thereof restraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne within reasons rule her madding mood containe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There did the warlike Maide her selfe repose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under the wings of Isis all that night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with sweete rest her heavy eyes did close,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After that long daies toile and weary plight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where whilest her earthly parts with soft delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of sencelesse sleepe did deeply drowned lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There did appeare unto her heavenly spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A wondrous vision, which did close implie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The course of all her fortune and posteritie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her seem'd, as she was doing sacrifize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Isis, deckt with Mitre on her hed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And linnen stole after those Priestes guize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All sodainely she saw transfigured</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her linnen stole to robe of scarlet red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Moone-like Mitre to a Crowne of gold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That even she her selfe much wondered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At such a chaunge, and joyed to behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her selfe adorn'd with gems and jewels manifold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, in the midst of her felicity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An hideous tempest seemed from below</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To rise through all the Temple sodainely,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from the Altar all about did blow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The holy fire, and all the embers strow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uppon the ground; which, kindled privily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into outragious flames unwares did grow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the Temple put in jeopardy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of flaming, and her selfe in great perplexity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that the Crocodile, which sleeping lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under the Idols feete in fearelesse bowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seem'd to awake in horrible dismay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As being troubled with that stormy stowre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gaping greedy wide did streight devoure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both flames and tempest: with which growen great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And swolne with pride of his owne peerelesse powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan to threaten her likewise to eat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that the Goddesse with her rod him backe did beat.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho turning all his pride to humblesse meeke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him selfe before her feete he lowly threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gan for grace and love of her to seeke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which she accepting, he so neare her drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of his game she soone enwombed grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And forth did bring a Lion of great might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shortly did all other beasts subdew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that she waked full of fearefull fright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And doubtfully dismayd through that so uncouth sight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So thereuppon long while she musing lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With thousand thoughts feeding her fantasie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill she spide the lampe of lightsome day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Up-lifted in the porch of heaven hie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then up she rose fraught with melancholy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And forth into the lower parts did pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereas the Priestes she found full busily</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About their holy things for morrow Mas;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom she saluting faire, faire resaluted was:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But by the change of her unchearefull looke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They might perceive she was not well in plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that some pensivenesse to heart she tooke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore thus one of them, who seem'd in sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be the greatest and the gravest wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To her bespake: "Sir Knight, it seemes to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, thorough evill rest of this last night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ill apayd or much dismayd ye be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That by your change of cheare is easie for to see."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Certes," (sayd she) "sith ye so well have spide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The troublous passion of my pensive mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I will not seeke the same from you to hide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But will my cares unfolde, in hope to find</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your aide to guide me out of errour blind."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Say on" (quoth he) "the secret of your hart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, by the holy vow which me doth bind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I am adjur'd best counsell to impart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To all that shall require my comfort in their smart."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then gan she to declare the whole discourse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all that vision which to her jippeard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As well as to her minde it had recourse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which when he unto the end had heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to a weake faint-hearted man he fared</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through great astonishment of that strange sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, with long locks up-standing, stifly stared</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like one adawed with some dreadfull spright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, fild with heavenly fury, thus he her benight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Magnificke Virgin, that in queint disguise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">British armes doest maske thy royall blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">S to pursue a perillous emprize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How couldst thou weene, through that disguized hood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hide thy state from being understood?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can from th'immortall Gods ought hidden bee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They doe thy linage, and thy Lordly brood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They doe thy sire lamenting sore for thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They doe thy love forlorne in womens thraldome see.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"The end whereof, and all the long event,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They do to thee in this same dreame discover;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that same Crocodile doth represent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The righteous Knight that is thy faithfull lover,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to Osyris in all just endever:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that same Crocodile Osyris is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That under Isis feete doth sleepe for ever;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To shew that clemence oft, in things amis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Restraines those sterne behests and cruell doomes of his.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"That Knight shall all the troublous stormes asswage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And raging flames, that many foes shall reare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hinder thee from the just heritage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of thy sires Crowne, and from thy countrey deare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then shalt thou take him to thy loved fere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And joyne in equall portion of thy realme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And afterwards a sonne to him shalt beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Lion-like shall shew his powre extreame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So blesse thee God, and give theejoyance of thy dreame!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All which when she unto the end had heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She much was eased in her troublous thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on those Priests bestowed rich reward;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And royall gifts of gold and silver wrought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She for a present to their Goddesse brought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then taking leave of them, she forward went</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke her love, where he was to be sought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne rested till she came without relent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the land of Amazons, as she was bent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whereof when newes to Radigund was brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not with amaze, as women wonted bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She was confused in her troublous thought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But fild with courage and with joyous glee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As glad to heare of armes, the which now she</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had long surceast, she bad to open bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she the face of her new foe might see:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when they of that yron man had told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which late her folke had slaine, she bad them forth to hold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So there without the gate, (as seemed best)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She caused her Pavilion be pight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which stout Britomart her selfe did rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles Talus watched at the dore all night.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All night likewise they of the towne in fright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uppon their wall good watch and ward did keepe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The morrow next, so soone as dawning light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bad doe away the dampe of drouzie sleepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The warlike Amazon out of her bowre did peepe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And caused streight a Trumpet loud to shrill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To warne her foe to battell soone be prest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, long before awoke, (for she ful ill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could sleepe all night, that in unquiet brest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did closely harbour such a jealous guest)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was to the battell whilome ready (light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones that warriouresse with haughty crest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did forth issue all ready for the fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On th'other side her foe appeared soone in sight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But ere they reared hand the Amazone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began the streight conditions to propound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which she used still to tye her fone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To serve her so as she the rest had bound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when the other heard, she sternly frownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For high disdaine of such indignity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And would no lenger treat, but bad them sound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For her no other termes should ever tie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then what prescribed were by lawes of chevalrie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Trumpets sound, and they together run</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With greedy rage, and with their faulchins smot;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne either sought the others strokes to shun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But through great fury both their skill forgot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And practicke use in armes; ne spared not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their dainty parts, which nature had created</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So faire and tender without staine or spot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For other uses then they them translated;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which they now hackt and hewd as if such use they hated.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when a Tygre and a Lionesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are met at spoyling of some hungry pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both challenge it with equall greedinesse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But first the Tygre clawes thereon did lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therefore, loth to loose her right away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth in defence thereof full stoutly stond:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which the Lion strongly doth gainesay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she to hunt the beast first tooke in hond;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore ought it have where ever she it fond.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Full fiercely layde the Amazon about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dealt her blowes unmercifully sore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Britomart withstood with courage stout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And them repaide againe with double more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So long they fought, that all the grassie flore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was fild with bloud which from their sides did flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gushed through their armes, that all in gore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They trode, and on the ground their lives did strow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like fruitles seede, of which untimely death should grow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last proud Radigund, with fell despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having by chaunce espide advantage neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let drive at her with all her dreadfull might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thus upbrayding said: "This token beare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the man whom thou doest love so deare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tell him for his sake thy life thou gavest."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which spitefull words she, sore engriev'd to heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus answer'd: "Lewdly thou my love depravest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who shortly must repent that now so vainely bravest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nath'lesse that stroke so cruell passage found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That glauncing on her shoulder-plate it bit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the bone, and made a griesly wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she her shield, through raging smart of it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could scarse uphold: yet soone she it requit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, having force increast through furious paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She her so rudely on the helmet smit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it empierced to the very braine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her proud person low prostrated on the plaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Where being layd, the wrothfull Britonesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stayd not till she came to her selfe againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in revenge both of her loves distresse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her late vile reproch though vaunted vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And also of her wound which sore did paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She with one stroke both head and helmet cleft.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which dreadfull sight when all her warlike traine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There present saw, each one of sence bereft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fled fast into the towne, and her sole victor left.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But yet so fast they could not home retrate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that swift Talus did the formost win;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, pressing through the preace unto the gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pelmell with them attonce did enter in.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There then a piteous slaughter did begin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all that ever came within his reach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He with his yron flale did thresh so thin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he no worke at all left for the leach:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like to an hideous storme, which nothing may empeach.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now by this the noble Conqueresse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her selfe came in, her glory to partake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where, though revengefull vow she did professe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet when she saw the heapes which he did make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of slaughtred carkasses, her heart did quake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For very ruth, which did it almost rive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she his fury willed him to slake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For else he sure had left not one alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all, in his revenge, of spirite would deprive.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho, when she had his execution stayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She for that yron prison did enquire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which her wretched love was captive layd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which breaking open with indignant ire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She entred into all the partes entire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where when she saw that lothly uncouth sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of men disguiz'd in womanishe attire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her heart gan grudge for very deepe despight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of so unmanly maske in misery misdight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last when as to her owne Love she came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom like disguize no lesse deformed had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At sight thereof abasht with secrete shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She turnd her head aside, as nothing glad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To have beheld a spectacle so bad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then too well believ'd that which tofore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Jealous suspect as true untruely drad:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which vaine conceipt now nourishing no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She sought with ruth to salve his sad misfortunes sore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Not so great wonder and astonishment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did the most chast Penelope possesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see her Lord, that was reported drent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dead long since in dolorous distresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Come home to her in piteous wretchednesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After long travell of full twenty yeares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she knew not his favours likelynesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For many scarres and many hoary heares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But stood long staring on him mongst uncertaine feares.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ah, my deare Lord! what sight is this?" quoth she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"What May-game hath misfortune made of you?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where is that dreadfull manly looke? where be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those mighty palmes, the which ye wont t'embrew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In bloud of Kings, and great hoastes to subdew?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could ought on earth so wondrous change have wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As to have robde you of that manly hew?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could so great courage stouped have to ought?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, farewell fleshly force! I see thy pride is nought."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thenceforth she streight into a bowre him brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And causd him those uncomely weedes undight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in their steede for other rayment sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof there was great store, and armors bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which had bene reft from many a noble Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom that proud Amazon subdewed had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilest Fortune favourd her successe in fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which when as she him anew had clad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She was reviv'd, and joyd much in his semblance glad.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So there a while they afterwards remained.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him to refresh, and her late wounds to heale:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">During which space she there as Princess rained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And changing all that forme of common-weale</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The liberty of women did repeale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which they had long usurpt; and, them restoring</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To mens subjection, did true Justice deale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all they, as a Goddesse her adoring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her wisedome did admire, and hearkned to her loring.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For all those Knights, which long in captive shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had shrowded bene, she did from thraldome free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And magistrates of all that city made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gave to them great living and large fee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that they should for ever faithfull bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made them sweare fealty to Artegall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who when him selfe now well recur'd did see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He purposd to proceed, what so befall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Uppon his first adventure which him forth did call.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Full sad and sorrowfull was Britomart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For his departure, her new cause of griefe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet wisely moderated her owne smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeing his honor, which she tehdred chiefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Consisted much in that adventures priefe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The care whereof, and hope of his successe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gave unto her great comfort and reliefe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That womanish complaints she did represse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tempred for the time her present heavinesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There she continu'd for a certaine space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till through his want her woe did more increase:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then hoping that the change of aire and place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would change her paine, and sorrow somewhat ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She parted thence her anguish to appease.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Meane-while her noble Lord, sir Artegall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Went on his way; ne ever howre did cease</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till he redeemed had that Lady thrall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That for another Canto will more fitly fall.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-8" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Prince Arthure and Sir Artegall</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Free Samient from feare:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They slay the Soudan; drive his wife</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Alicia to despaire.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Nought under heaven so strongly doth allure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sence of man, and all his minde possesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As beauties lovely baite, that doth procure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great warriours oft their rigour to represse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mighty hands forget their manlinesse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drawne with the powre of an heart-robbing eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wrapt in fetters of a golden tresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That can with melting pleasaunce mollifye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their hardned hearts, enur'd to bloud and cruelty.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So whylome learnd that mighty Jewish swaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each of whose lockes did match a man in might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To lay his spoiles before his lemans traine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So also did that great Oetean Knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For his loves sake his Lions skin undight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so did warlike Antony neglecl:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The worlds whole rule for Cleopatras sight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such wondrous powre hath wemens faire aspect</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To captive men, and make them all the world reject.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet could it not sterne Artegall retainc,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor hold from suite of his avowed quest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he had undertane to Gloriane;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But left his love, albe her strong request,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Britomart in languor and unrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rode him selfe uppon his first intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne day nor night did ever idly rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne wight but onely Talus with him went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The true guide of his way and vertuous government.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So travelling, he chaunst far off to heed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Damzell, flying on a palfrey fast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before two Knights that after her did speed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all their powre, and her full fiercely chast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hope to have her overhent at last:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet fled she fast, and both them farre outwent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Carried with wings of feare, like fowle aghast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With locks all loose, and rayment all to-rent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ever as she rode her eye was backeward bent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone after these he saw another Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That after those two former rode apace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With speare in rest, and prickt with all his might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So ran they all, as they had bene at bace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They being chased that did others chase.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At length he saw the hindmost overtake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One of those two, and force him turne his face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">However loth he were his way to slake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet mote he algates now abide, and answere make.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But th'other still pursu'd the fearefull Mayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who still from him as fast away did flie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne once for ought her speedy passage stayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that at length she did before her spie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir Artegall; to whom she straight did hie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With gladfull hast, in hope of him to get</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Succour against her greedy enimy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who seeing her approch gan forward set</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To save her from her feare, and him from force to let.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But he, like hound full greedy of his pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being impatient of impediment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Continu'd still his course, and by the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thought with his speare him quight have overwent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So both together, ylike felly bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like fiercely met. But Artegall was stronger,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And better skild in Tilt and Turnament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bore him quite out of his saddle, longer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then two speares length: So mischiefe overmatcht the wronger.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And in his fall misfortune him mistooke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For on his head unhappily he pight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That his owne waight his necke asunder broke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And left there dead. Meane-while the other Knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Defeated had the other faytour quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all his bowels in his body brast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom leaving there in that dispiteous plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He ran still on, thinking to follow fast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His other fellow Pagan which before him past.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Instead of whom finding there ready prest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir Artegall, without discretion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He at him ran with ready speare in rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, seeing him come still so fiercely on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against him made againe. So both anon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Together met, and strongly either strooke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And broke their speares; yet neither has forgon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His horses backe, yet to and fro long shooke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tottred, like two towres which through a tempest quooke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, when againe they had recovered sence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They drew their swords, in mind to make amends</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For what their speares had fayld of their pretence:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when the Damzell, who those deadly ends</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of both her foes had scene, and now her frends</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For her beginning a more fearefull fray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She to them runnes in hast, and her haire rends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Crying to them their cruell hands to stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Untill they both doe heare what she to them will say.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They stayd their hands, when she thus gan to speake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ah gentle Knights! what meane ye thus unwise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon your selves anothers wrong to wreake?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I am the wrong'd, whom ye did enterprise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both to redresse, and both redrest likewise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Witnesse the Paynims both, whom ye may see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There dead on ground. What doe ye then devise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of more revenge? if more, then I am shee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which was the roote of all: end your revenge on mee."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when they heard so say, they lookt about</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weete if it were true as she had told;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where when they saw their foes dead out of doubt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones they gan their wrothfull hands to hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Ventailes reare each other to behold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho when as Artegall did Arthure vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So faire a creature and so wondrous bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He much admired both his heart and hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And touched with intire affection nigh him drew;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Saying, "Sir Knight, of pardon I you pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all unweeting have you wrong'd thus sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Suffring my hand against my heart to stray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which if ye please forgive, I will therefore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yeeld for amends my selfe yours evermore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or what so penaunce shall by you be red."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom the Prince: "Certes me needeth more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To crave the same; whom errour so misled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As that I did mistake the living for the ded.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But, sith ye please that both our blames shall die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amends may for the trespasse soone be made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since neither is endamadg'd much thereby."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So can they both them selves full eath perswade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To faire accordaunce, and both faults to shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Either embracing other lovingly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And swearing faith to either on his blade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Never thenceforth to nourish enmity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But either others cause to maintaine mutually.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then Artegall gan of the Prince enquire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What were those knights which there on ground were layd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And had receiv'd their follies worthy hire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for what cause they chased so that Mayd?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Certes I wote not well," (the Prince then sayd)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"But by adventure found them faring so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As by the way unweetingly I strayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lo! the Damzell selfe, whence all did grow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of whom we may at will the whole occasion know."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then they that Damzell called to them nie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And asked her what were those two her fone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whom she earst so fast away did flie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And what was she her selfe so woe-begone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for what cause pursu'd of them attone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom she thus: "Then wote ye well, that I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe serve a Queene that not far hence doth wone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Princesse of great powre and majestic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Famous through all the world, and honor'd far and nie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Her name Mercilla most men use to call;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is a mayden Queene of high renowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For her great bounty knowen over all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soveraine grace, with which her royall crowne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She doth support, and strongly beateth downe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The malice of her foes, which her envy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at her happinesse do fret and frowne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet she her selfe the more doth magnify,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And even to her foes her mercies multiply.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Mongst many which maligne her happy state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There is a mighty man, which wonnes hereby,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with most fell despight and deadly hate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seekes to subvert her Crowne and dignity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all his powre doth thereunto apply:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her good Knights, of which so brave a band</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Serves her as any Princesse under sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He either spoiles, if they against him stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or to his part allures, and bribeth under hand.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ne him sufficeth all the wrong and ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he unto her people does each day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that he seekes by traytrous traines to spill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her person, and her sacred selfe to slay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, O ye Heavens, defend! and turne away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From her unto the miscreant him selfe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That neither hath religion nor fay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But makes his God of his ungodly pelfe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Idols serves: so let his Idols serve the Elfe!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"To all which cruell tyranny, they say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He is provokt, and stird up day and night</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By his bad wife that hight Adicia;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who counsels him, through confidence of might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To breake all bonds of law and rules of right:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she her selfe professeth mortall foe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Justice, and against her still doth fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Working to all that love her deadly woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And making all her Knights and people to doe so.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Which my liege Lady seeing, thought it best</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that his wife in friendly wise to deale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For stint of strife and stablishment of rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both to her selfe and to her common-weale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all forepast displeasures to repeale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So me in message unto her she sent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To treat with her, by way of enterdeale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of finall peace and faire attonement</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which might concluded be by mutuall consent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"All times have wont safe passage to afford</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To messengers that come for causes just:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But this proude Dame, disdayning all accord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not onely into bitter termes forth brust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Reviling me and rayling as she lust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But lastly, to make proofe of utmost shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me like a dog she out of dores did thrust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Miscalling me by many a bitter name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That never did her ill, ne once deserved blame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And lastly, that no shame might wanting be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When I was gone, soone after me she sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These two false Knights, whom there ye lying see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be by them dishonoured and shent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, thankt be God, and your good hardiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They have the price of their pwne folly payd."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So said this Damzell, that hight Samient;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to those knights for their so noble ayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her selfe most gratefull shew'd, and heaped thanks repayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But they now having throughly heard and scene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Al those great wrongs, the which that mayd complained</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To have bene done against her Lady Queene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By that proud dame which her so much disdained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were moved much thereat; and twixt them fained</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all their force to worke avengement strong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uppon the Souldan selfe, which it mayntained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on his Lady, th'author of that wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And uppon all those Knights that did to her belong.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, thinking best by counterfet disguise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To their deseigne to make the easier way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They did this complot twixt them selves devise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First, that Sir Artegall should him array</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like one of those two Knights which dead there lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then that Damzell, the sad Samient,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should as his purchast prize with him convay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the Souldans court, her to present</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto his scornefull Lady that for her had sent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So as they had deviz'd, Sir Artegall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him clad in th'armour of a Pagan knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And taking with him, as his vanquisht thrall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Damzell, led her to the Souldans right:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where soone as his proud wife of her had sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth of her window as she looking lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She weened streight it was her Paynim Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which brought that Damzell as his purchast pray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sent to him a Page that mote direcl: his way.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who bringing them to their appointed place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Offred his service to disarme the Knight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he refusing him to let unlace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For doubt to be discovered by his sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kept himselfe still in his straunge armour dight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone after whom the Prince arrived there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sending to the Souldan in despight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A bold defyance, did of him requere</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Damsell whom he held as wrongfull prisonere.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Wherewith the Souldan all with furie fraught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Swearing and banning most blasphemously,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Commaunded straight his armour to be brought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, mounting straight upon a charret hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(With yron wheeles and hookes arm'd dreadfully,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And drawne of cruell steedes which he had fed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With flesh of men, whom through fell tyranny</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He slaughtred had, and ere they were halfe ded</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their bodies to his beastes for provender did spred,)</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So forth he came, all in a cote of plate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Burnisht with bloudie rust; whiles on the greene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Briton Prince him readie did awayte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In glistering armes right goodly well-beseene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shone as bright as doth the heaven sheene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by his stirrup Talus did attend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Playing his pages part, as he had beene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before directed by his Lord; to th'end</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He should his flale to final execution bend.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus goe they both together to their geare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With like fierce minds, but meanings different;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the proud Souldan, with presumpteous cheare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And countenance sublime and insolent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sought onely slaughter and avengement;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the brave Prince for honour and for right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst tortious powre and lawlesse regiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the behalfe of wronged weake did fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More in his causes truth he trusted then in might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like to the Thracian Tyrant, who they say</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto his horses gave his guests for meat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till he himselfe was made their greedie pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And torne in pieces by Alcides great;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So thought the Souldan, in his follies threat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Either the Prince in peeces to have torne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his sharp wheeles, in his first rages heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or under his fierce horses feet have borne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And trampled downe in dust his thoughts disdained scorne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But the bold child that perill well espying,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If he too rashly to his charet drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gave way unto his horses speedie flying,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And their resistlesse rigour did eschew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, as he passed by, the Pagan threw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A shivering dart with so impetuous force,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That had he not it shun'd with heedfull vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It had himselfe transfixed or his horse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or made them both one masse withouten more remorse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Oft drew the Prince unto his charret nigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hope some stroke to fasten on him neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he was mounted in his seat so high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his wingfooted coursers him did beare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So fast away that, ere his readie speare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He could advance, he farre was gone and past:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet still he him did follow every where,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And followed was of him likewise full fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So long as in his steedes the flaming breath did last.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Againe the Pagan threw another dart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which he had with him abundant store</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On every side of his embatteld cart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of all other weapons lesse or more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which warlike uses had deviz'd of yore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wicked shaft, guyded through th'ayrie wyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By some bad spirit that it to mischiefe bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stayd not, till through his curat it did glyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made a griesly wound in his enriven side.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Much was he grieved with that haplesse throe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That opened had the welspring of his blood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But much the more, that to his hatefull foe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He mote not come to wreake his wrathfull mood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That made him rave, like to a Lyon wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which being wounded of the huntsmans hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cannot come neare him in the covert wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where he with boughes hath built his shady stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fenst himselfe about with many a flaming brand.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Still when he sought t'approch unto him ny</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His charret wheeles about him whirled round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made him backe againe as fast to fly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke his steedes, like to an hungry hound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hunting after game hath carrion found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So cruelly did him pursew and chace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That his good steed, all were he much renound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For noble courage and for hardie race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Durst not endure their sight, but fled from place to place.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus long they trast and traverst to and fro,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeking by every way to make some breach;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet could the Prince not nigh unto him goe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That one sure stroke he might unto him reach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereby his strengthes assay he might him teach.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last from his victorious shield he drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The vaile, which did his powrefull light empeach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And comming full before his horses vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As they upon him prest, it plaine to them did shew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like lightening flash that hath the gazer burned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So did the sight thereof their sense dismay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That backe againe upon themselves they turned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with their ryder ranne perforce away:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne could the Souldan them from flying stay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With raynes or wonted rule, as well he knew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nought feared they what he could do or say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But th'onely feare that was before their vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From which like mazed deare dismayfully they flew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Fast did they fly as them their feete could beare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">High over hilles, and lowly over dales,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As they were follow'd of their former feare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In vaine the Pagan bannes, and sweares, and rayles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And backe with both his hands unto him hayles</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The resty raynes, regarded now no more:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He to them calles and speakes, yet nought avayles;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They heare him not, they have forgot his lore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But go which way they list, their guide they have forlore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when the fine-mouthed steedes, which drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Sunnes bright wayne to Phaetons decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone as they did the monstrous Scorpion vew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With ugly craples crawling in their way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dreadfull sight did them so sore affray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That their well-knowen courses they forwent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, leading th'ever-burning lampe astray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This lower world nigh all to ashes brent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And left their scorched path yet in the firmament.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such was the furie of these head-strong steeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone as the infants sunlike shield they saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all obedience both to words and deeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They quite forgot, and scornd all former law:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through woods, and rocks, and mountaines they did draw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The yron charet, and the wheeles did teare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tost the Paynim without feare or awe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From side to side they tost him here and there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crying to them in vaine that nould his crying heare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet still the Prince pursew'd him close behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oft making offer him to smite, but found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No easie meanes according to his mind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last they have all overthrowne to ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quite topside turvey, and the Pagan hound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst the yron hookes and graples keene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Torne all to rags, and rent with many a wound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That no whole peece of him was to be scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But scattred all about, and strow'd upon the greene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like as the cursed son of Theseus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That following his chace in dewy morne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To fly his stepdames loves outrageous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his owne steedes was all to peeces torne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his faire limbs left in the woods forlorne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That for his sake Diana did lament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the wooddy Nymphes did wayle and mourne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So was this Souldan rapt and all to-rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That of his shape appear'd no litle moniment.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Onely his shield and armour, which there lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though nothing whole, but all to-brusd and broken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He up did take, and with him brought away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That mote remaine for an eternall token</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To all mongst whom this storie should be spoken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How worthily, by heavens high decree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Justice that day of wrong her selfe had wroken;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all men, which that spectacle did see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By like ensample mote for ever warned bee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So on a tree before the Tyrants dore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He caused them be hung in all mens sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be a moniment for evermore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when his Ladie from the castles hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beheld, it much appald her troubled spright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet not, as women wont, in dolefull fit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She was dismayd, or faynted through affright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But gathered unto her her troubled wit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gan eftsoones devize to be aveng'd for it.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Streight downe she ranne, like an enraged cow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is berobbed of her youngling dere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With knife in hand, and fatally did vow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wreake her on that mayden messengere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom she had causd be kept as prisonere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By Artegall, misween'd for her owne Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That brought her backe: And, comming present there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She at her ran with all her force and might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All flaming with revenge and furious despight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like raging Ino, when with knife in hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She threw her husbands murdred infant out;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or fell Medea, when on Colchicke strand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her brothers bones she scattered all about;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or as that madding mother, mongst the rout</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Bacchus Priests, her owne deare flesh did teare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet neither Ino, nor Medea stout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor all the Mcenades so furious were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As this bold woman when she saw that Damzell there.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Artegall, being thereof aware,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did stay her cruell hand ere she her raught;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, as she did her selfe to strike prepare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of her fist the wicked weapon caught:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that, like one enfelon'd or distraught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She forth did rome whether her rage her bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With franticke passion and with furie fraught;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, breaking forth out at a posterne dore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the wyld wood ranne, her dolours to deplore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As a mad bytch, when as the franticke fit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her burning tongue with rage inflamed hath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth runne at randon, and with furious bit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Snatching at every thing doth wreake her wrath</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On man and beast that commeth in her path.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There they doe say that she transformed was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into a Tygre, and that Tygres scath</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In crueltie and outrage she did pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To prove her surname true, that she imposed has.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then Artegall, himselfe discovering plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did issue forth gainst all that warlike rout</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of knights and armed men, which did maintaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Ladies part, and to the Souldan lout:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which he did assault with courage stout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All were they nigh an hundred knights of name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And like wyld Goates them chaced all about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flying from place to place with cowheard shame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that with finall force them all he overcame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then caused he the gates be opened wyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there the Prince, as victour of that day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With tryumph entertayn'd and glorifyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Presenting him with all the rich array</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And roiall pompe, which there long hidden lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Purchast through lawlesse powre and tortious wrong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that proud Souldan whom he earst did slay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So both, for rest, there having stayd not long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Marcht with that mayd; fit matter for another song.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-9" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Arthur and Artegall catch Guyle,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Whom Talus doth dismay;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They to Mercillaes Pallace come,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And see her rich array.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>What Tygre, or what other salvage wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is so exceeding furious and fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As wrong, when it hath arm'd it selfe with might?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not fit mongst men that doe with reason mell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But mongst wyld beasts, and salvage woods, to dwell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where still the stronger doth the weake devoure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And they that most in boldnesse doe excell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are dreadded most, and feared for their powre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fit for Adicia there to build her wicked bowre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There let her wonne, farre from resort of men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where righteous Artegall her late exyled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There let her ever keepe her damned den,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where none may be with her lewd parts defyled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor none but beasts may be of her despoyled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And turne we to the noble Prince, where late</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We did him leave, after that he had foyled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cruell Souldan, and with dreadfull fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had utterly subverted his unrighteous state.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Where having with Sir Artegall a space</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well solast in that Souldans late delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They both, resolving now to leave the place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both it and all the wealth therein behight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto that Damzell in her Ladies right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so would have departed on their way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she them woo'd, by all the meanes she might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And earnestly besought to wend that day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With her, to see her Ladie thence not farre away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By whose entreatie both they overcommen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Agree to goe with her; and by the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(As often falles) of sundry things did commen:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst which that Damzell did to them bewray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A straunge adventure, which not farre thence lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet, a wicked villaine, bold and stout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which wonned in a rocke not farre away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That robbed all the countrie there about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And brought the pillage home, whence none could get it out.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereto both his owne wylie wit, (she sayd)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the fastnesse of his dwelling place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both unassaylable, gave him great ayde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he so crafty was to forge and face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So light of hand, and nymble of his pace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So smooth of tongue, and subtile in his tale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That could deceive one looking in his face:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore by name Malengin they him call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well knowen by his feates, and famous over all.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Through these his slights he many doth confound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the rocke, in which he wonts to dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is wondrous strong and hewen farre under ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A dreadfull depth; how deepe no man can tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But some doe say it goeth downe to hell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all within it full of wyndings is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hidden wayes, that scarse an hound by smell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can follow out those false footsteps of his,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne none can backe returne that once are gone amis.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when those knights had heard, their harts gan earne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To understand that villeins dwelling place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And greatly it desir'd of her to learne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by which way they towards it should trace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Were not" (sayd she) "that it should let your pace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Towards my Ladies presence, by you ment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I would you guyde directly to the place."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Then let not that" (said they) "stay your intent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For neither will one foot, till we that carle have hent."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So forth they past, till they approched ny</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the rocke where was the villains won:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when the Damzell neare at hand did spy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She warn'd the knights thereof; who thereupon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan to advize what best were to be done.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So both agreed to send that mayd afore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where she might sit nigh to the den alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wayling, and raysing pittifull uprore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if she did some great calamitie deplore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With noyse whereof when as the caytive carle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should issue forth, in hope to find some spoyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They in awayt would closely him ensnarle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere to his den he backward could recoyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so would hope him easily to foyle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Damzell straight went, as she was directed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the rocke; and there, upon the soyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having her selfe in wretched wize abjecled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gan weepe and wayle, as if great griefe had her affected.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The cry whereof entring the hollow cave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones brought forth the villaine, as they ment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hope of her some wishfull boot to have.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full dreadfull wight he was as ever went</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the earth, with hollow eyes deepe pent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And long curld locks that downe his shoulders shagged;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on his backe an uncouth vestiment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made of straunge stuffe, but all to-worne and ragged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And underneath, his breech was all to-torne and jagged.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And in his hand an huge long staffe he held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose top was arm'd with many an yron hboke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fit to catch hold of all that he could weld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or in the compasse of his douches tooke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever round about he cast his looke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Als at his backe a great wyde net he bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which he seldome fished at the brooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But usd to fish for fooles on the dry shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which he in faire weather wont to take great store.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Him when the damzell saw fast by her side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So ugly creature, she was nigh dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now for helpe aloud in earnest cride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when the villame saw her so affrayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan with guilefull words her to perswade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To banish feare; and, with Sardonian smyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Laughing on her, his false intent to shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan forth to lay his bayte her to beguyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That from her self unwares he might her steale the whyle.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like as the fouler on his guilefull pype</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Charmes to the birds full many a pleasant lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they the whiles may take lesse heedie keepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How he his nets doth for their ruine lay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So did the villaine to her prate and play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many pleasant trickes before her show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To turne her eyes from his intent away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he in slights and jugling feates did flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of legierdemayne the mysteries did know.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To which whilest she lent her intentive mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He suddenly his net upon her threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That oversprad her like a puffe of wind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And snatching her soone up, ere well she knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ran with her fast away unto his mew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Crying for helpe aloud: But when as ny</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He came unto his cave, and there did vew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The armed knights stopping his passage by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He threw his burden downe, and fast away did fly.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Artegall him after did pursew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles the Prince there kept the entrance still.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Up to the rocke he ran, and thereon flew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like a wyld Gote, leaping from hill to hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dauncing on the craggy cliffes at will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That deadly daunger seem'd in all mens sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tempt such steps, where footing was so ill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought avayled for the armed knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thinke to follow him that was so swift and light.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when he saw, his yron man he sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To follow him; for he was swift in chace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He him pursewd where ever that he went;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both over rockes, and hilles, and every place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where so he fled, he followd him apace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that he shortly forst him to forsake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hight, and downe descend unto the base:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There he him courst a-fresh, and soone did make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To leave his proper forme, and other shape to take.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Into a Foxe himselfe he first did tourne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he him hunted like a Foxe full fast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then to a bush himselfe he did transforme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he the bush did beat, till that at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into a bird it chaung'd, and from him past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flying from tree to tree, from wand to wand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he then stones at it so long did cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That like a stone it fell upon the land;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he then tooke it up, and held fast in his hand.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So he it brought with him unto the knights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to his Lord Sir Artegall it lent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Warning him hold it fast for feare of slights:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who whilest in hand it gryping hard he hent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into a Hedgehogge all unwares it went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And prickt him so that he away it threw:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then ganne it runne away incontinent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being returned to his former hew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Talus soone him overtooke, and backward drew,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, when as he would to a snake againe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have turn'd himselfe, he with his yron flayle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan drive at him with so huge might and maine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all his bones as small as sandy grayle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He broke, and did his bowels disentrayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Crying in vaine for helpe, when helpe was past:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So did deceipt the selfe-deceiver fayle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There they him left a carrion outcast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For beasts and foules to feede upon for their repast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thence forth they passed with that gentle Mayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see her Ladie, as they did agree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which when she approched, thus she sayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Loe! now, right noble knights, arriv'd ye bee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nigh to the place which ye desir'd to see:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There shall ye see my soverayne Lady Queene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most sacred wight, most debonayre and free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ever yet upon this earth was scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or that with Diademe hath ever crowned beene."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The gentle knights rejoyced much to heare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The prayses of that Prince so manifold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, passing litle further, commen were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where they a stately pallace did behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of pompous show, much more then she had told;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With many towres, and tarras mounted hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all their tops bright glistering with gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemed to outshine the dimmed skye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with their brightnesse daz'd the straunge beholders eye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There they alighting by that Damzell were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Directed in, and shewed all the sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose porch, that most magnificke did appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stood open wyde to all men day and night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet warded well by one of mickle might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sate thereby, with gyantlike resemblance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To keepe out guyle, and malice, and despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That under shew oftimes of fayned semblance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are wont in Princes courts to worke great scath and hindrance</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His name was Awe; by whom they passing in</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Went up the hall, that was a large wyde roome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And full of people making troublous din</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wondrous noyse, as if that there were some</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which unto them was dealing righteous doome:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By whom they passing through the thickest preasse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The marshall of the hall to them did come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His name hight Order; who, commaunding peace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Them guyded through the throng, that did their clamors ceasse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They ceast their clamors upon them to gaze;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom seeing all in armour bright as day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Straunge there to see, it did them much amaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with unwonted terror halfe affray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For never saw they there the like array;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever was the name of warre there spoken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But joyous peace and quietnesse alway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dealing just judgements, that mote not be broken</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For any brybes, or threates of any to be wroken.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There, as they entred at the Scriene, they saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some one whose tongue was for his trespasse vyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nayld to a post, adjudged so by law;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that therewith he falsely did revyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And foule blaspheme that Queene for forged guyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both with bold speaches which he blazed had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with lewd poems which he did compyle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the bold title of a poet bad</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He on himselfe had ta'en, and rayling rymes had sprad.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus there he stood, whylest high over his head</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There written was the purport of his sin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In cyphers strange, that few could rightly read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bon Font; but Bon, that once had written bin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was raced out, and Mai was now put in:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So now Malfont was plainely to be red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eyther for th'evill which he did therein,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that he likened was to a welhed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of evill words, and wicked sclaunders by him shed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They, passing by, were guyded by degree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the presence of that gratious Queene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who sate on high, that she might all men see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And might of all men royally be scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a throne of gold full bright and sheene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adorned all with gemmes of endlesse price,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As either might for wealth have gotten bene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or could be fram'd by workmans rare device;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all embost with Lyons and with Flour-delice.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All over her a cloth of state was spred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not of rich tissew, nor of cloth of gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor of ought else that may be richest red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But like a cloud, as likest may be told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her brode-spreading wings did wyde unfold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose skirts were bordred with bright sunny beames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Glistring like gold amongst the plights enrold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And here and there shooting forth silver streames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mongst which crept litle Angels through the glittering gleames.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Seemed those litle Angels did uphold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cloth of state, and on their purpled wings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did beare the pendants through their nimblesse bold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besides, a thousand more of such as sings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hymns to high God, and carols heavenly things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Encompassed the throne on which she sate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She, Angel-like, the heyre of ancient kings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mightie Conquerors, in royall state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whylest kings and kesars at her feet did them prostrate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus she did sit in soverayne Majestic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Holding a Scepter in her royall hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sacred pledge of peace and clemencie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which high God had blest her happie land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Maugre so many foes which did withstand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But at her feet her sword was likewise layde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose long rest rusted the bright steely brand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet when as foes enforst, or friends sought ayde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She could it sternely draw, that all the world dismayde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And round about before her feet there sate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A bevie of faire Virgins clad in white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That goodly seem'd t'adorne her royall state;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All lovely daughters of high Jove, that hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Litse, by him begot in loves delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the righteous Themis; those, they say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon Joves judgement-seat wayt day and night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, when in wrath he threats the worlds decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They doe his anger calme, and cruell vengeance stay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They also doe, by his divine permission,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the thrones of mortall Princes tend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And often treat for pardon and remission</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To suppliants, through frayltie which offend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those did upon Mercillaes throne attend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Just Dice, wise Eunomie, myld Eirene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And them amongst, her glorie to commend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sate goodly Temperance in garments clene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sacred Reverence yborne of heavenly strene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus did she sit in royall rich estate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Admyr'd of many, honoured of all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whylest underneath her feete, there as she sate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An huge great Lyon lay, that mote appall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An hardie courage, like captived thrall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a strong yron chaine and coller bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That once he could not move, nor quich at all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet did he murmure with rebellious sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And softly royne, when salvage choler gan redound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So sitting high in dreaded soverayntie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those two strange knights were to her presence brought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, bowing low before her Majestic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did to her myld obeysance, as they ought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And meekest boone that they imagine mought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom she eke inclyning her withall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As a faire stoupe of her high soaring thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A chearefull countenance on them let fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet tempred with some majestic imperiall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As the bright sunne, what time his fierie teme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Towards the westerne brim begins to draw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gins to abate the brightnesse of his beme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fervour of his flames somewhat adaw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So did this mightie Ladie, when she saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those two strange knights such homage to her make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bate somewhat of that Majestic and awe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That whylome wont to doe so many quake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with more myld aspect those two to entertake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now at that instant, as occasion fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When these two stranger knights arriv'd in place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She was about affaires of common-wele,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dealing with Justice with indifferent grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hearing pleas of people meane and base:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst which, as then, there was for to be heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The tiyall of a great and weightie case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which on both sides was then debating hard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But at the sight of these those were awhile debard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, after all her princely entertayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To th' hearing of that former cause in hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her selfe eftsoones she gan convert againe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which that those knights likewise mote understand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And witnesse forth aright in forrain land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Taking them up unto her stately throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where they mote heare the matter throughly scand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On either part, she placed th'one on th'one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The other on the other side, and neare them none.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then was there brought, as prisoner to the barre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Ladie of great countenance and place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that she it with foule abuse did marre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet did appeare rare beautie in her face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But blotted with condition vile and base,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all her other honour did obscure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And titles of nobilitie deface:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet in that wretched semblant she did sure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The peoples great compassion unto her allure.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then up arose a person of deepe reach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rare in-sight hard matters to revele;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That well could charme his tongue, and time his speach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To all assayes; his name was called Zele.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan that Ladie strongly to appele</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of many haynous crymes by her enured;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with sharp reasons rang her such a pele,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That those, whom she to pitie had allured,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He now t'abhorre and loath her person had procured.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>First gan he tell how this, that seem'd so faire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And royally arayd, Duessa hight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That false Duessa, which had wrought great care</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mickle mischiefe unto many a knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By her beguyled and confounded quight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But not for those she now in question came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though also those mote question'd be aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But for vyld treasons and outrageous shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which she against the dred Mercilla oft did frame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For she whylome (as ye mote yet right well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Remember) had her counsels false conspyred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With faithlesse Blandamour and Paridell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Both two her paramours, both by her hyred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both with hope of shadowes vaine inspyred)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with them pracliz'd, how for to depryve</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mercilla of her crowne, by her aspyred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she might it unto her selfe deryve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tryumph in their blood whom she to death did dryve.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But through high heavens grace, which favour not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wicked driftes of trayterous desynes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst loiall Princes, all this cursed plot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere proofe it tooke, discovered was betymes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And th'aclours won the meede meet for their crymes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such be the meede of all that by such mene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the type of kingdomes title clymes!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But false Duessa, now untitled Queene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was brought to her sad doome, as here was to be scene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Strongly did Zele her haynous fact enforce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many other crimes of foule defame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against her brought, to banish all remorse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And aggravate the horror of her blame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with him, to make part against her, came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Many grave persons that against her pled.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First was a sage old Syre, that had to name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Kingdomes Care, with a white silver hed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That many high regards and reasons gainst her red.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then gan Authority her to appose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With peremptorie powre, that made all mute;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then the Law of Nations gainst her rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And reasons brought that no man could refute:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Next gan Religion gainst her to impute</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">High Gods beheast, and powre of holy lawes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan the Peoples cry and Commons sute</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Importune care of their owne publicke cause;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lastly Justice charged her with breach of lawes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But then, for her, on the contrarie part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rose many advocates for her to plead:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First there came Pittie with full tender hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with her joyn'd Regard of womanhead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then came Daunger, threatning hidden dread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And high alliance unto forren powre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then came Nobilitie of birth, that bread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great ruth through her misfortunes tragicke stowre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lastly Griefe did plead, and many teares forth powre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With the neare touch whereof in tender hart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Briton Prince was sore empassionate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And woxe inclined much unto her part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through the sad terror of so dreadfull fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wretched ruine of so high estate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That for great ruth his courage gan relent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when as Zele perceived to abate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan his earnest fervour to augment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many fearefull objects to them to present.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He gan t'efforce the evidence anew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And new accusements to produce in place:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He brought forth that old hag of hellish hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cursed Ate, brought her face to face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who privie was and partie in the case:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She, glad of spoyle and ruinous decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did her appeach; and, to her more disgrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The plot of all her practise did display,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all her traynes and all her treasons forth did lay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then brought he forth with griesly grim aspect</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abhorred Murder, who, with bloudie knyfe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet dropping fresh in hand, did her detect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there with guiltie bloudshed charged ryfe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then brought he forth Sedition, breeding stryfe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In troublous wits, and mutinous uprore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then brought he forth Incontinence of lyfe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even foule Adulterie her face before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lewd Impietie, that her accused sore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All which when as the Prince had heard and scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His former fancies ruth he gan repent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from her partie eftsoones was drawen cleene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Artegall, with constant firme intent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For zeale of Justice, was against her bent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So was she guiltie deemed of them all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Zele began to urge her punishment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to their Queene for judgement loudly call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto Mercilla myld, for Justice gainst the thrall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But she, whose Princely brest was touched nere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With piteous ruth of her so wretched plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though plaine she saw, by all that she did heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she of death was guiltie found by right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet would not let just vengeance on her light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But rather let, instead thereof, to fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Few perling drops from her faire lampes of light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which she covering with her purple pall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would have the passion hid, and up arose withall.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-10" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Prince Arthur takes the enterprize,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">For Belgee for the fight:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gerioneos Seneschall</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">He slayes in Belges right.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Some Clarkes doe doubt in their devicefull art</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether this heavenly thing whereof I treat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weeten Mercie, be of Justice part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or drawne forth from her by divine extreate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This well I wote, that sure she is as great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And meriteth to have as high a place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith in th'Almighties everlasting seat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She first was bred, and borne of heavenly race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From thence pour'd down on men by influence of grace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For if that Vertue be of so great might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which from just verdict will for nothing start,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to preserve inviolated right</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oft spilles the principall to save the part;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So much more, then, is that of powre and art</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seekes to save the subject of her skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet never doth from doome of right depart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As it is greater prayse to save then spill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And better to reforme then to cut off the ill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who then can thee, Mercilla, throughly prayse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That herein doest all earthly Princes pas?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What heavenly Muse shall thy great honour rayse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Up to the skies, whence first deriv'd it was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now on earth it selfe enlarged has</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From th'utmost brinke of the Armericke shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the margent of the Molucas?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those Nations farre thy justice doe adore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thine owne people do thy mercy prayse much more.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Much more it praysed was of those two knights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The noble Prince and righteous Artegall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When they had scene and heard her doome a-rights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against Duessa, damned by them all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by her tempred without griefe or gall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till strong constraint did her thereto enforce:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet even then ruing her wilfull fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With more then needfull naturall remorse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yeelding the last honour to her wretched corse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>During all which, those knights continu'd there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both doing and receiving curtesies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that great Ladie, who with goodly chere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them entertayn'd, fit for their dignities,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Approving dayly to their noble eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Royall examples of her mercies rare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And worthie paterns of her clemencies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which till this day mongst many living are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who them to their posterities doe still declare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Amongst the rest, which in that space befell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There came two Springals of full tender yeares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Farre thence from forrein land where they did dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke for succour of her and her Peares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With humble prayers and intreatfull teares;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sent by their mother, who, a widow, was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wrapt in great dolours and in deadly feares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By a strong Tyrant, who invaded has</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her land, and slaine her children ruefully, alas!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her name was Belgae; who in former age</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Ladie of great worth and wealth had beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mother of a frutefull heritage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even seventeene goodly sonnes; which who had scene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In their first flowre, before this fatall teene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them overtooke and their faire blossomes blasted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More happie mother would her surely weene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then famous Niobe, before she tasted</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Latonaes childrens wrath that all her issue wasted,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But this fell Tyrant, through his tortious powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had left her now but five of all that brood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For twelve of them he did by times devoure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to his Idols sacrifice their blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whylest he of none was stopped nor withstood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For soothly he was one of matchlesse might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of horrible aspecl and dreadfull mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And had three bodies in one wast empight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And th'armes and legs of three to succour him in fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And sooth they say that he was borne and bred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Gyants race, the sonne of Geryon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He that whylome in Spaine so sore was dred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For his huge powre and great oppression,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which brought that land to his subjection,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through his three bodies powre in one combynd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke all strangers, in that region</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arry ving, to his kyne for food assynd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fayrest kyne alive, but of the fiercest kynd:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For they were all, they say, of purple hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kept by a cowheard, hight Eurytion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A cruell carle, the which all strangers slew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne day nor night did sleepe t'attend them on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But walkt about them ever and anone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his two-headed dogge that Orthrus hight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Orthrus begotten by great Typhaon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And foule Echidna in the house of night:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Hercules them all did overcome in fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His sonne was this Geryoneo hight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, after that his monstrous father fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under Alcides club, streight tooke his flight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From that sad land where he his syre did quell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And came to this, where Beige then did dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And flourish in all wealth and happinesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being then new made widow (as befell)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After her Noble husbands late decesse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which gave beginning to her woe and wretchednesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then this bold Tyrant, of her widowhed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Taking advantage, and her yet fresh woes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himselfe and service to her offered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her to defend against all forrein foes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That should their powre against her right oppose:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof she glad, now needing strong defence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him entertayn'd and did her champion chose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which long he usd with carefull diligence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The better to confirme her fearelesse confidence.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By meanes whereof she did at last commit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All to his hands, and gave him soveraine powre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To doe whatever he thought good or fit:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which having got, he gan forth from that howre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To stirre up strife and many a tragicke stowre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Giving her dearest children one by one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto a dreadfull Monster to devoure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And setting up an Idole of his owne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The image of his monstrous parent Geryone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So tyrannizing and oppressing all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The woefull widow had no meanes now left,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But unto gratious great Mercilla call</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ayde against that cruell Tyrants theft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere all her children he from her had reft:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore these two, her eldest sonnes, she sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke for succour of this Ladies gieft;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom their sute they humbly did present</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In th' hearing of full many Knights and Ladies gent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Amongst the which then fortuned to bee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The noble Briton Prince with his brave Peare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who when he none of all those knights did see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hastily bent that enterprise to heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor undertake the same for cowheard feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He stepped forth with courage bold and great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Admyr'd of all the rest in presence there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And humbly gan that mightie Queene entreat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To graunt him that adventure for his former feat.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She gladly graunted it: then he straightway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himselfe unto his journey gan prepare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all his armours readie dight that day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nought the morrow next mote stay his fare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The morrow next appeared with purple hayre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet dropping fresh out of the Indian fount,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bringing light into the heavens fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When he was readie to his steede to mount</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto his way, which now was all his care and count.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then taking humble leave of that great Queene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who gave him roiall giftes and riches rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As tokens of her thankefull mind beseene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And leaving Artegall to his owne care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his voyage forth he gan to fare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With those two gentle youthes, which him did guide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all his way before him still prepare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne after him did Artigall abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But on his first adventure forward forth did ride.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It was not long till that the Prince arrived</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within the land where dwelt that Ladie sad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof that Tyrant had her now deprived,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And into moores and marshes banisht had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the pleasant soyle and cities glad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which she wont to harbour happily:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But now his cruelty so sore she drad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to those fennes for fastnesse she did fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there her selfe did hyde from his hard tyranny.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There he her found in sorrow and dismay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All solitarie without living wight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all her other children, through affray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had hid themselves, or taken further flight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke her selfe, through sudden strange affright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When one in armes she saw, began to fly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when her owne two sonnes she had in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She gan take hart and looke up joyfully;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For well she wist this knight came succour to supply.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, running unto them with greedy joyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fell straight about their neckes as they did kneele,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bursting forth in teares, "Ah! my sweet boyes,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Sayd she) "yet now I gin new life to feele;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And feeble spirits, that gan faint and reele,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now rise againe at this your joyous sight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alreadie seemes that fortunes headlong wheele</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Begins to turne, and sunne to shine more bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then it was wont, through comfort of this noble knight."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then turning unto him; "And you, Sir knight,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Said she) "that taken have this toylesome paine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For wretched woman, miserable wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May you in heaven immortall guerdon gaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For so great travell as you doe sustaine!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For other meede may hope for none of mee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom nought else but bare life doth remaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that so wretched one, as ye do see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is liker lingring death then loathed life to bee."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Much was he moved with her piteous plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And low dismounting from his loftie steede</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan to recomfort her all that he might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeking to drive away deepe-rooted dreede</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hope of helpe in that her greatest neede.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So thence he wished her with him to wend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto some place where they mote rest and feede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And she take comfort which God now did send:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good hart in evils doth the evils much amend.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ay me!" (sayd she) "and whether shall I goe?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are not all places full of forraine powres?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My pallaces possessed of my foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My cities sackt, and their sky-threating towres</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Raced and made smooth fields now full of flowres?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Onely these marishes and myrie bogs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which the fearefull ewftes do build their bowres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yeeld me an hostry mongst the croking frogs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And harbour here in safety from those ravenous dogs."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Nathlesse," (said he) "deare Ladie, with me goe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some place shall us receive and harbour yield;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If not, we will it force, maugre your foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And purchase it to us with speare and shield:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if all fayle, yet farewell open field;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The earth to all her creatures lodging lends."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With such his chearefull speaches he doth wield</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her mind so well, that to his will she bends;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, bynding up her locks and weeds, forth with him wends.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They came unto a Citie farre up land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which whylome that Ladies owne had bene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But now by force extort out of her hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By her strong foe, who had defaced cleene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her stately towres and buildings sunny sheene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shut up her haven, mard her marchants trade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Robbed her people that full rich had beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in her necke a Castle huge had made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which did her commaund without needing perswade.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That Castle was the strength of all that state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill that state by strength was pulled downe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that same citie, so now ruinate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had bene the keye of all that kingdomes crowne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both goodly Castle, and both goodly Towne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that th'offended heavens list to lowre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon their blisse, and balefull fortune frowne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When those gainst states and kingdomes do conjure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who then can thinke their hedlong ruine to recure?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But he had brought it now in servile bond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made it beare the yoke of Inquisition,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stryving long time in vaine it to withstond;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet glad at last to make most base submission,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And life enjoy for any composition:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So now he hath new lawes and orders new</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Imposd on it with many a hard condition,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And forced it, the honour that is dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To God, to doe unto his Idole most untrew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To him he hath before this Castle greene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Built a faire Chappell, and an Altar framed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of costly Ivory full rich beseene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which that cursed Idole, farre proclamed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He hath set up, and him his God hath named;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ofrring to him in sinfull sacrifice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The flesh of men, to Gods owne likenesse framed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And powring forth their bloud in brutishe wize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That any yron eyes to see it would agrize.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, for more horror and more crueltie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under that cursed Idols altar-stone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An hideous monster doth in darknesse lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose dreadfull shape was never scene of none</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That lives on earth; but unto those alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which unto him sacrificed bee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those he devoures, they say, both flesh and bone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What else they have is all the Tyrants fee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that no whit of them remayning one may see.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There eke he placed a strong garrisone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And set a Seneschall of dreaded might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That by his powre oppressed every one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And vanquished all ventrous knights in fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom he wont shew all the shame he might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After that them in battell he had wonne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which when now they gan approch in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Ladie counseld him the place to shonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where as so many knights had fouly bene fordonne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her fearefull speaches nought he did regard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, ryding streight under the Castle wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Called aloud unto the watchfull ward</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which there did wayte, willing them forth to call</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the field their Tyrants Seneschall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom when tydings thereof came, he streight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cals for his armes, and arming him withall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones forth pricked proudly in his might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gan with courage fierce addresse him to the fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They both encounter in the middle plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And their sharpe speares doe both together smite</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amid their shields, with so huge might and maine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seem'd their soules they wold have ryven quight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of their breasts with furious despight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet could the Seneschals no entrance find</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the Princes shield where it empight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(So pure the metall was and well refynd,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But shivered all about, and scattered in the wynd:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Not so the Princes, but with restlesse force</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into his shield it readie passage found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both through his haberjeon and eke his corse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which tombling downe upon the senselesse ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gave leave unto his ghost from thraldome bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wander in the griesly shades of night.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There did the Prince him leave in deadly swound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thence unto the castle marched right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see if entrance there as yet obtaine he might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, as he nigher drew, three knights he spyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All arm'd to point, issuing forth apace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which towards him with all their powre did ryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And meeting him right in the middle race</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did all their speares attonce on him enchace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As three great Culverings for battrie bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And leveld all against one certaine place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe all attonce their thunders rage forth rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That makes the wals to stagger with astonishment:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So all attonce they on the Prince did thonder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who from his saddle swarved nought asyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne to their force gave way, that was great wonder;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But like a bulwarke firmely did abyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rebutting him, which in the midst did ryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With so huge rigour, that his mortall speare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Past through his shield and pierst through either syde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That downe he fell uppon his mother deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And powred forth his wretched life in deadly dreare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when his other fellowes saw, they fled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As fast as feete could carry them away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after them the Prince as swiftly sped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be aveng'd of their unknightly play.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There, whilest they entring th'one did th'other stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hindmost in the gate he overhent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, as he pressed in, him there did slay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His carkasse, tumbling on the threshold, sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His groning soule unto her place of punishment.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The other which was entred laboured fast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sperre the gate; but that same lumpe of clay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose grudging ghost was thereout fled and past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right in the middest of the threshold lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it the Posterne did from closing stay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles the Prince hard preased in betweene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And entraunce wonne: Streight th'other fled away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ran into the Hall, where he did weene</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him selfe to save; but he there slew him at the skreene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then all the rest which in that Castle were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeing that sad ensample them before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Durst not abide, but fled away for feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And them convayd out at a Posterne dore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long sought the Prince; but when he found no more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T'oppose against his powre he forth issued</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto that Lady, where he her had lore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her gan cheare with what she there had vewed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what she had not scene within unto her shewed:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who with right humble thankes him goodly greeting</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For so great prowesse as he there had proved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much greater then was ever in her weeting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With great admiraunce inwardly was moved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And honourd him with all that her behoved.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thenceforth into that Castle he her led</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With her two sonnes, right deare of her beloved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where all that night them selves they cherished,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from her balefull minde all care he banished.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-11" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Prince Arthure overcomes the great</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Gerioneo in fight:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Doth slay the Monster, and restore</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Belge unto her right.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It often fals, in course of common life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That right long time is overborne of wrong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through avarice, or powre, or guile, or strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That weakens her, and makes her party strong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Justice, though her dome she doe prolong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet at the last she will her owne cause right:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As by sad Beige seemes; whose wrongs though long</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She suffred, yet at length she did requight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sent redresse thereof by this brave Briton Knight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whereof when newes was to that Tyrant brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How that the Lady Beige now had found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Champion, that had with his Champion fought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And laid his Seneschall low on the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke him selfe did threaten to confound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan to burne in rage, and friese in feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doubting sad end of principle unsound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, sith he heard but one that did appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He did him selfe encourage and take better cheare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nathelesse him selfe he armed all in hast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And forth he far'd with all his many bad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne stayed step, till that he came at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the Castle which they conquerd had:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There with huge terrour, to be more ydrad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He sternely marcht before the Castle gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, with bold vaunts and ydle threatning, bad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deliver him his owne, ere yet too late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To which they had no right, nor any wrongfull state.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Prince staid not his aunswere to devize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, opening streight the Sparre, forth to him came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full nobly mounted in right warlike wize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And asked him, if that he were the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who all that wrong unto that wofull Dame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So long had done, and from her native land</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Exiled her, that all the world spake shame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He boldly aunswerd him, He there did stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That would his doings justifie with his owne hand.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that so furiously at him he flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if he would have over-run him streight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his huge great yron axe gan hew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So hideously uppon his armour bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he to peeces would have chopt it quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the bold Prince was forced foote to give</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To his first rage, and yeeld to his despight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whilest at him so dreadfully he drive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That seem'd a marble rocke asunder could have rive.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereto a great advauntage eke he has</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through his three double hands thrise multiplyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besides the double strength which in them was:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For stil, when fit occasion did betyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He could his weapon shift from side to syde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From hand to hand; and with such nimblesse sly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could wield about, that, ere it were espide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wicked stroke did wound his enemy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behinde, beside, before, as he it list apply.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which uncouth use when as the Prince perceived,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan to watch the wielding of his hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least by such slight he were unwares deceived;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever, ere he saw the stroke to land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He would it meete and warily withstand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One time when he his weapon faynd to shift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he was wont, and chang'd from hand to hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He met him with a counterstroke so swift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That quite smit off his arme as he it up did lift.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith all fraught with fury and disdaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He brayd aloud for very fell despight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sodainely, t'avenge him selfe againe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan into one assemble all the might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all his hands, and heaved them on hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thinking to pay him with that one for all:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the sad steele seizd not, where it was hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uppon the childe, but somewhat short did fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lighting on his horses head him quite did mall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Downe streight to ground fell his astonisht steed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke to th'earth his burden with him bare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he him selfe full lightly from him freed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gan him selfe to fight on foote prepare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof when as the Gyant was aware,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He wox right blyth, as he had got thereby,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And laught so loud, that all his teeth wide bare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One might have scene enraung'd disorderly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like to a rancke of piles that pitched are awry.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones againe his axe he raught on hie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere he were throughly buckled to his geare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And can let drive at him so dreadfullie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That had he chaunced not his shield to reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere that huge stroke arrived on him neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He had him surely cloven quite in twaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But th'Adamantine shield which he did beare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So well was tempred, that for all his maine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It would no passage yeeld unto his purpose vaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet was the stroke so forcibly applide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That made him stagger with uncertaine sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if he would have tottered to one side:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith full wroth he fiercely gan assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That curt'sie with like kindnesse to repay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And smote at him with so importune might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That two more of his armes did fall away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like fruitlesse braunches, which the hatchets slight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath pruned from the native tree, and cropped quight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that all mad and furious he grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like a fell mastiffe through enraging heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And curst, and band, and blasphemies forth threw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against his Gods, and fire to them did threat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hell unto him selfe with horrour great.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thenceforth he car'd no more which way he strooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor where it light; but gan to chaufe and sweat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gnasht his teeth, and his head at him shooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sternely him beheld with grim and ghastly looke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nought fear'd the childe his lookes, ne yet his threats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But onely wexed now the more aware</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To save him selfe from those his furious heats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And watch advauntage how to worke his care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which good Fortune to him offred faire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For as he in his rage him overstrooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He, ere he could his weapon backe repaire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His side all bare and naked overtooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with his mortal steel quite through the body strooke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Through all three bodies he him strooke attonce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the three attonce fell on the plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Else should he thrise have needed for the nonce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them to have stricken, and thrise to have slaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So now all three one sencelesse lumpe remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enwallow'd in his owne blacke bloudy gore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And byting th'earth for very deaths disdaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, with a cloud of night him covering, bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Downe to the house of dole, his daies there to deplore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when the Lady from the Castle saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where she with her two sonnes did looking stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She towards him in hast her selfe did draw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To greet him the good fortune of his hand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the people, both of towne and land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which there stood gazing from the Citties wall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uppon these warriours, greedy t'understand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whether should the victory befall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now when they saw it falne, they eke him greeted all.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Beige, with her sonnes, prostrated low</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before his feete in all that peoples sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst joyes mixing some tears, mongst wele some wo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him thus bespake: "O most redoubted Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which hast me, of all most wretched wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That earst was dead, restor'd to life againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And these weake impes replanted by thy might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What guerdon can I give thee for thy paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But even that which thou savedst thine still to remaine?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He tooke her up forby the lilly hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her recomforted the best he might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saying; "Deare Lady, deedes ought not be scand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By th'authors manhood, nor the doers might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by their trueth and by the causes right:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That same is it which fought for you this day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What other meed, then, need me to requight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that which yeeldeth vertues meed alway?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is, the vertue selfe, which her reward doth pay."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She humbly thankt him for that wondrous grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And further sayd: "Ah! Sir, but mote ye please,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith ye thus farre have tendred my poore case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As from my chiefest foe me to release,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That your victorious arme will not yet cease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till ye have rooted all the relickes out</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that vilde race, and stablished my peace."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"What is there else" (sayd he) "left of their rout?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Declare it boldly, Dame, and doe not stand in dout."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Then wote you, Sir, that in this Church hereby</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There stands an Idole of great note and name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which this Gyant reared first on hie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of his owne vaine fancies thought did frame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom, for endlesse horrour of his shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He offred up for daily sacrifize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My children and my people, burnt in flame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all the tortures that he could devize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The more t'aggrate his God with such his blouddy guize.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And underneath this Idoll there doth lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An hideous monster that doth it defend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And feedes on all the carkasses that die</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In sacrifize unto that cursed feend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose ugly shape none ever saw, nor kend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ever scap'd: for of a man, they say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It has the voice, that speaches forth doth send,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even blasphemous words, which she doth bray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of her poysnous entrails fraught with dire decay."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when the Prince heard tell, his heart gan earne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For great desire that Monster to assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And prayd the place of her abode to learne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which being shew'd, he gan him selfe streightway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereto addresse, and his bright shield display.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So to the Church he came, where it was told</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Monster underneath the Altar lay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There he that Idoll saw of massy gold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most richly made, but there no Monster did behold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Upon the Image with his naked blade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Three times, as in defiance, there he strooke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the third time out of an hidden shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There forth issewd from under th'Altars smooke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A dreadfull feend with fowle deformed looke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That stretcht it selfe as it had long lyen still;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her long taile and fethers strongly shooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the Temple did with terrour fill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet him nought terrified that feared nothing ill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>An huge great Beast it was, when it in length</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was stretched forth, that nigh fild all the place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seem'd to be of infinite great strength:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Horrible, hideous, and of hellish race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Borne of the brooding of Echidna base,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or other like infernall furies kinde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For of a Mayd she had the outward face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hide the horrour which did lurke behinde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The better to beguile whom she so fond did finde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereto the body of a dog she had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of fell ravin and fierce greedinesse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Lions clawes, with powre and rigour clad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To rend and teare what so she can oppresse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Dragons taile, whose sting without redresse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full deadly wounds where so it is empight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Eagles wings, for scope and speedinesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nothing may escape her reaching might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereto she ever list to make her hardy flight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Much like in foulnesse and deformity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto that Monster, whom the Theban Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The father of that fatall progeny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made kill her selfe for very hearts despight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he had red her Riddle, which no wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could ever loose but suffred deadly doole:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So also did this Monster use like slight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To many a one which came unto her schoole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom she did put to death, deceived like a foole.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She comming forth, when as she first beheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The armed Prince with shield so blazing bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her ready to assaile, was greatly queld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And much dismayd with that dismayfull sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That backe she would have turnd for great affright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he gan her with courage fierce assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That forst her turne againe in her despight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To save her selfe, least that he did her slay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sure he had her slaine, had she not turnd her way.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho, when she saw that she was forst to fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She flew at him like to an hellish feend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on his shield tooke hold with all her might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if that it she would in peeces rend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or reave out of the hand that did it hend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strongly he strove out of her greedy gripe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To loose his shield, and long while did contend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when he could not quite it, with one stripe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her Lions clawes he from her feete away did wipe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that aloude she gan to bray and yell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fowle blasphemous speaches forth did cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bitter curses, horrible to tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That even the Temple, wherein she was plast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did quake to heare, and nigh asunder brast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho with her huge long taile she at him strooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That made him stagger and stand halfe agast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With trembling joynts, as he for terrour shooke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who nought was terrifide, but greater courage tooke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when the Mast of some well-timbred hulke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is with the blast of some outragious storme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blowne downe, it shakes the bottome of the bulke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And makes her ribs to cracke as they were torne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilest still she stands, as stonisht and forlorne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So was he stound with stroke of her huge taile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, ere that it she backe againe had borne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He with his sword it strooke, that without faile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He jointed it, and mard the swinging of her flaile.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then gan she cry much louder then afore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the people there without it heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Beige selfe was therewith stonied sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if the onely sound thereof she feard.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But then the feend her selfe more fiercely reard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uppon her wide great wings, and strongly flew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all her body at his head and beard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That had he not foreseene with heedfull vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thrown his shield atween, she had him done to rew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, as she prest on him with heavy sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under her wombe his fatall sword he thrust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for her entrailes made an open way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To issue forth; the which, once being brust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to a great Mill-damb forth fiercely gusht,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And powred out of her infernall sinke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most ugly filth; and poyson therewith rusht,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That him nigh choked with the deadly stinke.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such loathly matter were small lust to speake or thinke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then downe to ground fell that deformed Masse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Breathing out clouds of sulphure fowle and blacke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which a puddle of contagion was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More loathd then Lerna, or then Stygian lake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That any man would nigh awhaped make:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when he saw on ground, he was full glad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And streight went forth his gladnesse to partake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Beige, who watcht all this while full sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wayting what end would be of that same daunger drad.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when she saw so joyously come forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She gan rejoyce and shew triumphant chere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lauding and praysing his renowmed worth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By all the names that honorable were.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then in he brought her, and her shewed there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The present of his paines, that Monsters spoyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke that Idoll deem'd so costly dere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom he did all to peeces breake, and foyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In filthy durt, and left so in the loathely soyle.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then all the people which beheld that day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan shout aloud, that unto heaven it rong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the damzels of that towne in ray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Come dauncing forth, and joyous carrols song:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So him they led through all their streetes along</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Crowned with girlonds of immortall baies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the vulgar did about them throng</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see the man, whose everlasting praise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They all were bound to all posterities to raise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There he with Belgas did awhile remaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Making great feast and joyous merriment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill he had her settled in her raine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With safe assuraunce and establishment:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then to his first emprize his mind he lent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full loath to Belgas and to all the rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whom yet taking leave thence forth he went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to his former journey him addrest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On which long way he rode, ne ever day did rest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But turne we now to noble Artegall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, having left Mercilla, streight way went</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On his first quest, the which him forth did call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet, to worke Irenaes franchisement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke Grantortoes worthy punishment.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So forth he fared, as his manner was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With onely Talus wayting diligent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through many perils; and much way did pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till nigh unto the place at length approcht he has.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There as he traveld by the way, he met</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An aged wight wayfaring all alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who through his yeares long since aside had set</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The use of armes, and battell quite forgone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom as he approcht, he knew anone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it was he which whilome did attend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On faire Irene in her affliction,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When first to Faery court he saw her wend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto his soveraine Queene her suite for to commend.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom by his name saluting, thus he gan:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Haile, good Sir Sergis, truest Knight alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well tride in all thy Ladies troubles than</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When her that Tyrant did of Crowne deprive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What new occasion doth thee hither drive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles she alone is left, and thou here found?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or is she thrall, or doth she not survive?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom he thus: "She liveth sure and sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But by that Tyrant is in wretched thraldome bound:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"For she presuming on th'appointed tyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which ye promist, as ye were a Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To meete her at the salvage Hands syde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then and there for triall of her right</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With her unrighteous enemy to fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did thither come; where she, afrayd of nought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By guilefull treason and by subtill slight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Surprized was, and to Grantorto brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who her imprisond hath, and her life often sought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And now he hath to her prefixt a day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which if that no champion doe appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which will her cause in battailous array</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against him justifie, and prove her cleare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all those crimes that he gainst her doth reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She death shall sure aby." Those tidings sad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did much abash Sir Artegall to heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And grieved sore that through his fault she had</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fallen into that Tyrants hand and usage bad.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then thus replide: "Now sure and by my life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Too much am I to blame for that faire Maide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That have her drawne to all this troublous strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through promise to afford her timely aide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which by default I have not yet defraide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But witnesse unto me, ye heavens! that know</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How cleare I am from blame of this upbraide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ye into like thraldome me did throw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And kept from complishing the faith which I did owe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But now aread, Sir Sergis, how long space</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath he her lent a Champion to provide?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ten daies," (quoth he) "he graunted hath of grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that he weeneth well before that tide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">None can have tidings to assist her side:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all the shores, which to the sea accoste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He day and night doth ward both farre and wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none can there arrive without an hoste:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So her he deemes already but a damned ghoste."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Now turne againe," (Sir Artegall then sayd)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"For, if I live till those ten daies have end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Assure your selfe, Sir Knight, she shall have ayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though I this dearest life for her doe spend."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So backeward he attone with him did wend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, as they rode together on their way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A rout of people they before them kend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flocking together in confusde array;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if that there were some tumultuous affray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To which as they approcht the cause to know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They saw a Knight in daungerous distresse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of a rude rout him chasing to and fro,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sought with lawlesse powre him to oppresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bring in bondage of their brutishnesse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And farre away, amid their rakehell bands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They spide a Lady left all succourlesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Crying, and holding up her wretched hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To him for aide, who long in vaine their rage withstands.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet still he strives, ne any perill spares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To reskue her from their rude violence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And like a Lion wood amongst them fares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dealing his dreadfull blowes with large dispence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst which the pallid death findes no defence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all in vaine: their numbers are so great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That naught may boot to banishe them from thence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For soone as he their outrage backe doth beat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They turne afresh, and oft renew their former threat.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now they doe so sharpely him assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they his shield in peeces battred have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And forced him to throw it quite away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fro dangers dread his doubtfull life to save;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Albe that it most safety to him gave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And much did magnifie his noble name:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, from the day that he thus did it leave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst all Knights he blotted was with blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And counted but a recreant Knight with endles shame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when they thus distressed did behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They drew unto his aide; but that rude rout</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them also gan assaile with outrage bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And forced them, how ever strong and stout</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They were, as well approv'd in many a doubt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Backe to recule; untill that yron man</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his huge flaile began to lay about;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whose sterne presence they diffused ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like scattred chaffe the which the wind away doth fan.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So when that Knight from perill cleare was freed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He drawing neare began to greete them faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yeeld great thankes for their so goodly deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In saving him from daungerous despaire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of those which sought his life for to empaire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whom Sir Artegall gan then enquire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whole occasion of his late misfare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And who he was, and what those villaines were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which with mortall malice him pursu'd so nere.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom he thus: "My name is Burbon hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well knowne, and far renowmed heretofore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill late mischiefe did uppon me light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all my former praise hath blemisht sore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that faire Lady, which in that uprore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye with those caytives saw, Flourdelis hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is mine owne love, though me she have forlore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether withheld from me by wrongfull might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or with her owne good will, I cannot read aright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But sure to me her faith she first did plight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be my love, and take me for her Lord;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that a Tyrant, which Grandtorto hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With golden giftes and many a guilefull word</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Entyced her to him for to accord.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O! who may not with gifts and words be tempted?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith which she hath me ever since abhord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to my foe hath guilefully consented:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ay me, that ever guyle in wemen was invented!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And now he hath this troupe of villains sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By open force to fetch her quite away:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst whom my selfe I long in vaine have bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To rescue her, and daily meanes assay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet rescue her thence by no meanes I may,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For they doe me with multitude oppresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with unequall might doe overlay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That oft I driven am to great distresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And forced to forgoe th'attempt remedilesse."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But why have ye" (said Artegall) "forborne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your owne good shield in daungerous dismay?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is the greatest shame and foulest scorne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which unto any knight behappen may,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To loose the badge that should his deedes display."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom Sir Burbon, blushing halfe for shame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"That shall I unto you" (quoth he) "bewray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least ye therefore mote happily me blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And deeme it doen of will, that through inforcement came.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"True is that I at first was dubbed knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By a good knight, the knight of the Redcrosse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, when he gave me armes in field to fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gave me a shield, in which he did endosse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His deare Redeemers badge upon the bosse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The same long while I bore, and therewithall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fought many battels without wound or losse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith Grandtorto selfe I did appall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made him oftentimes in field before me fall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But for that many did that shield envie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cruell enemies increased more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To stint all strife and troublous enmitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That bloudie scutchin, being battered sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I layd aside, and have of late forbore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hoping thereby to have my love obtayned;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet can I not my love have nathemore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she by force is still fro me detayned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with corruptfull brybes is to untruth mis-trayned."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom thus Artegall: "Certes, Sir knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hard is the case the which ye doe complaine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet not so hard (for nought so hard may light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it to such a streight mote you constraine)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As to abandon that which doth containe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your honours stile, that is, your warlike shield.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All perill ought be lesse, and lesse all paine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then losse of fame in disaventrous field:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dye, rather then doe ought that mote dishonour yield/</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Not so," (quoth he) "for yet, when time doth serve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My former shield I may resume againe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To temporize is not from truth to swerve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne for advantage terme to entertaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When as necessitie doth it constraine."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Fie on such forgerie!" (sayd Artegall)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Under one hood to shadow faces twaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Knights ought be true, and truth is one in all:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all things, to dissemble, fouly may befall!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Yet let me you of courtesie request"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Said Burbon) "to assist me now at need</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against these pesants which have me opprest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And forced me to so infamous deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That yet my love may from their hands be freed."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir Artegall, albe he earst did wyte</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His wavering mind, yet to his aide agreed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, buckling him eftsoones unto the fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did set upon those troupes with all his powre and might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who flocking round about them, as a swarme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of flyes upon a birchen bough doth cluster,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did them assault with terrible allarme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And over all the fields themselves did muster,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With bils and glayves making a dreadfull luster,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That forst at first those knights backe to retyre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As when the wrathfull Boreas doth bluster,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nought may abide the tempest of his yre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both man and beast doe fly, and succour doe inquyre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, when as overblowen was that brunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those knights began afresh them to assayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all about the fields like Squirrels hunt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But chiefly Talus with his yron flayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst which no flight nor rescue mote avayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made cruell havocke of the baser crew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chaced them both over hill and dale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The raskall manie soone they overthrew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the two knights themselves their captains did subdew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last they came whereas that Ladie bode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom now her keepers had forsaken quight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To save themselves, and scattered were abrode.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her halfe dismayd they found in doubtfull plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As neither glad nor sorie for their sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet wondrous faire she was, and richly clad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In roiall robes, and many jewels dight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that those villens through their usage bad</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Them fouly rent, and shamefully defaced had.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Burbon, streight dismounting from his steed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto her ran with greedie great desyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And catching her fast by her ragged weed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would have embraced her with hart entyre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she backstarting with disdainefull yre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bad him avaunt, ne would unto his lore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Allured be for prayer nor for meed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when those knights so froward and forlore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beheld, they her rebuked and upbrayded sore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sayd Artegall: "What foule disgrace is this</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To so faire Ladie, as ye seeme in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To blot your beautie, that unblemisht is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With so foule blame as breach of faith once plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or change of love for any worlds delight!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is ought on earth so pretious or deare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As prayse and honour? Or is ought so bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And beautifull as glories beames appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose goodly light then Phoebus lampe doth shine more cleare?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Why then will ye, fond Dame, attempted bee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto a strangers love, so lightly placed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For guiftes of gold or any worldly glee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To leave the love that ye before embraced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And let your fame with falshood be defaced?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fie on the pelfe for which good name is sold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And honour with indignitie debased!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dearer is love then life, and fame then gold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But dearer then them both your faith once plighted hold."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Much was the Ladie in her gentle mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abasht at his rebuke, that bit her neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought to answere thereunto did find;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, hanging down her head with heavie cheare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stood long amaz'd as she amated weare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Burbon seeing her againe assayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, clasping twixt his armes, her up did reare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his steede, whiles she no whit gainesayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So bore her quite away, nor well nor ill apayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nathlesse the yron man did still pursew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That raskall many with unpitied spoyle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ceassed not, till all their scattred crew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the sea he drove quite from that soyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which they troubled had with great turmoyle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Artegall, seeing his cruell deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Commaunded him from slaughter to recoyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to his voyage gan againe proceed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that the terme, approching fast, required speed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-5-12" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Artegall doth Sir Burbon side,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And blames for changing shield:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He with the great Grantorto fights</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And slaieth him in field.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>O sacred hunger of ambitious mindes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And impotent desire of men to raine!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom neither dread of God, that devils bindes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor lawes of men, that common-weales containe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor bands of nature, that wilde beastes restraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can keepe from outrage and from doing wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where they may hope a kingdome to obtaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No faith so firme, no trust can be so strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No love so lasting then, that may enduren long.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Witnesse may Burbon be; whom all the bands</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which may a Knight assure had surely bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill the love of Lordship and of lands</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made him become most faithless and unsound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And witnesse be Gerioneo found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who for like cause faire Beige did oppresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And right and wrong most cruelly confound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so be now Grantorto, who no lesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then all the rest burst out to all outragiousnesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Gainst whom Sir Artegall, long having since</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Taken in hand th'exploit, (being theretoo</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Appointed by that mightie Faerie Prince,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great Gloriane, that Tyrant to fordoo,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through other great adventures hethertoo</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had it forslackt: But now time drawing ny</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To him assynd her high beheast to doo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the sea-shore he gan his way apply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To weete if shipping readie he mote there descry.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho when they came to the sea coast they found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A ship all readie (as good fortune fell)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To put to sea, with whom they did compound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To passe them over where them list to tell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The winde and weather served them so well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in one day they with the coast did fall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereas they readie found, them to rep ell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great hostes of men in order martiall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which them forbad to land, and footing did forstall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But nathemore would they from land refraine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when as nigh unto the shore they drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That foot of man might sound the bottome plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Talus into the sea did forth issew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though darts from shore and stones they at him threw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wading through the waves with stedfast sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Maugre the might of all those troupes in vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did win the shore; whence he them chast away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made to fly like doves whom the Eagle doth affray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The whyles Sir Artegall with that old knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did forth descend, there being none them neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And forward marched to a towne in sight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By this came tydings to the Tyrants eare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By those which earst did fly away for feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of their arrival: wherewith troubled sore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He all his forces streight to him did reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And forth issuing with his scouts afore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meant them to have encountred ere they left the shore:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But ere he marched farre he with them met,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fiercely charged them with all his force:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Talus sternely did upon them set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And brusht and battred them without remorse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That on the ground he left full many a corse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne any able was him to withstand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he them overthrew both man and horse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they lay scattred over all the land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As thicke as doth the seede after the sowers hand:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Till Artegall him seeing so to rage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Willd him to stay, and signe of truce did make:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which all harkning did a while asswage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their forces furie, and their terror slake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till he an Herauld cald, and to him spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Willing him wend unto the Tyrant streight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tell him that not for such slaughters sake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He thether came, but for to trie the right</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of fayre Irenaes cause with him in single fight:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And willed him for to reclayme with speed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His scattred people, ere they all were slaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And time and place convenient to areed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which they two the combat might darraine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which message when Grantorto heard, full fayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And glad he was the slaughter so to stay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pointed for the combat twixt them twayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The morrow next, ne gave him longer day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So sounded the retraite, and drew his folke away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That night Sir Artegall did cause his tent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There to be pitched on the open plaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he had given streight commaundement</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none should dare him once to entertaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which none durst breake, though many would right faine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For faire Irena, whom they loved deare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yet old Sergis did so well him paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from close friends, that dar'd not to appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He all things did purvay which for them needfull weare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The morrow next, that was the dismall day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Appointed for Irenas death before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So soone as it did to the world display</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His chearefull face, and light to men restore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The heavy Mayd, to whom none tydings bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Artegals arryvall her to free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lookt up with eyes full sad and hart full sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weening her lifes last howre then neare to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sith no redemption nigh she did not heare nor see.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then up she rose, and on her selfe did dight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most squalid garments, fit for such a day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with dull countenance and with doleful spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She forth was brought in sorrowfull dismay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For to receive the doome of her decay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But comming to the place, and finding there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir Artegall, in battailous array</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wayting his foe, it did her dead hart cheare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And new life to her lent in midst of deadly feare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like as a tender Rose in open plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with untimely drought nigh withered was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hung the head, soone as few drops of raine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereon distill and deaw her daintie face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gins to looke up, and with fresh wonted grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dispreds the glorie of her leaves gay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such was Irenas countenance, such her case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When Artegall she saw in that array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There wayting for the Tyrant till it was farre day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who came at length with proud presumpteous gate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the field, as if he fearelesse were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All armed in a cote of yron plate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of great defence to ward the deadly feare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on his head a steele-cap he did weare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of colour rustie-browne, but sure and strong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his hand an huge Polaxe did beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose steale was yron-studded, but not long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With which he wont to fight to justifie his wrong:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Of stature huge and hideous he was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to a Giant for his monstrous hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did in strength most sorts of men surpas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever any found his match in might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereto he had great skill in single fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His face was ugly and his countenance sterne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That could have frayd one with the very sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gaped like a gulfe when he did gerne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That whether man or monster one could scarse discerne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as he did within the listes appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With dreadfull looke he Artegall beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if he would have daunted him with feare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, grinning griesly, did against him weld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His deadly weapon which in hand he held:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But th' Elfin swayne, that oft had scene like sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was with his ghastly count'nance nothing queld;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But gan him streight to buckle to the fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cast his shield about to be in readie plight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The trompets sound, and they together goe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With dreadfull terror and with fell intent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And their huge strokes full daungerously bestow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To doe most dammage where as most they ment:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with such force and furie violent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Tyrant thundred his thicke blowes so fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That through the yron walles their way they rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And even to the vitall parts they past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne ought could them endure, but all they cleft or brast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which cruell outrage when as Artegall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did well avize, thenceforth with warie heed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He shund his strokes, where ever they did fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And way did give unto their gracelesse speed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As when a skilfull Marriner doth reed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A storme approching that doth perill threat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He will not bide the daunger of such dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But strikes his sayles, and vereth his mainsheat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lends unto it leave the emptie ayre to beat.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So did the Faerie knight himselfe abeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stouped oft his head from shame to shield:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No shame to stoupe, ones head more high to reare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, much to gaine, alitle for to yield:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So stoutest knights doen oftentimes in field.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But still the tyrant sternely at him layd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did his yron axe so nimbly wield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That many wounds into his flesh it made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with his burdenous blowes him sore did overlade.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet when as fit advantage he did spy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles the cursed felon high did reare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His cruell hand to smite him mortally,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under his stroke he to him stepping neare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right in the flanke him strooke with deadly dreare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the gore-bloud thence gushing grievously</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did underneath him like a pond appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all his armour did with purple dye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereat he brayed loud, and yelled dreadfully.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet the huge stroke, which he before intended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kept on his course as he did it direct,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with such monstrous poise adowne descended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemed nought could him from death protect;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he it well did ward with wise respect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And twixt him and the blow his shield did cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which thereon seizing tooke no great effect;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, byting deepe therein did sticke so fast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That by no meanes it backe againe he forth could wrast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Long while he tug'd and strove to get it out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all his powre applyed thereunto,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he therewith the knight drew all about:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nathlesse, for all that ever he could doe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His axe he could not from his shield undoe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Artegall perceiving strooke no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But loosing soone his shield did it forgoe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, whiles he combred was therewith so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He gan at him let drive more fiercely then afore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So well he him pursew'd, that at the last</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He stroke him with Chrysaor on the hed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with the souse thereof full sore aghast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He staggered to and fro in doubtfull sted.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Againe, whiles he him saw so ill bested,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He did him smite with all his might and maine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, falling, on his mother earth he fed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when he saw prostrated on the plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He lightly reft his head to ease him of his paine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when the people round about him saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They shouted all for joy of his successe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Glad to be quit from that proud Tyrants awe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with strong powre did them long time oppresse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, running all with greedie joyfulnesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To faire Irena, at her feet did fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her adored with due humblenesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As their true Liege and Princesse naturall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke her champions glorie sounded over all.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who streight her leading with meete majestic</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the pallace where their kings did rayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did her therein establish peaceablie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to her kingdomes seat restore agayne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all such persons, as did late maintayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Tyrants part with close or open ayde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He sorely punished with heavie payne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in short space, whiles there with her he stayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not one was left that durst her once have disobayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>During which time that he did there remayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His studie was true Justice how to deale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And day and night employ'd his busie paine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How to reforme that ragged common-weale:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that same yron man, which could reveale</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All hidden crimes, through all that realme he sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To search out those that usd to rob and steale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or did rebell gainst lawfull government;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On whom he did inflict most grievous punishment.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, ere he coulde reforme it thoroughly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He through occasion called was away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Faerie Court, that of necessity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His course of Justice he was forst to stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Talus to revoke from the right way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which he was that Realme for to redresse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But envies cloud still dimmeth vertues ray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So, having freed Irena from distresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He tooke his leave of her there left in heavinesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho, as he backe returned from that land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there arriv'd againe whence forth he set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He had not passed farre upon the strand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When as two old ill favour'd Hags he met,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By the way side being together set;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two griesly creatures: and, to that their faces</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most foule and filthie were, their garments yet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being all rag'd and tatter'd, their disgraces</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did much the more augment, and made most ugly cases.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The one of them, that elder did appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With her dull eyes did seeme to looke askew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her mis-shape much helpt; and her foule heare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hung loose and loathsomely: Thereto her hew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was wan and leane, that all her teeth arew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all her bones might through her cheekes be red:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her lips were, like raw lether, pale and blew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as she spake therewith she slavered;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet spake she seldom, but thought more the lesse she sed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her hands were foule and durtie, never washt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In all her life, with long nayles over-raught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like puttocks clawes; with th'one of which she scracht</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her cursed head, although it itched naught:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other held a snake with venime fraught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which she fed and gnawed hungrily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if that long she had not eaten ought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That round about her jawes one might descry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bloudie gore and poyson dropping lothsomely.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her name was Envie, knowen well thereby,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose nature is to grieve and grudge at all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ever she sees doen prays-worthily;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose sight to her is greatest crosse may fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And vexeth so that makes her eat her gall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, when she wanteth other thing to eat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She feedes on her owne maw unnaturall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of her owne foule entrayles makes her meat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meat fit for such a monsters monsterous dyeat:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And if she hapt of any good to heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That had to any happily betid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then would she inly fret, and grieve, and teare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her flesh for felnesse, which she inward hid:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if she heard of ill that any did,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or harme that any had, then would she make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great cheare, like one unto a banquet bid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in anothers losse great pleasure take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As she had got thereby and gayned a great stake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The other nothing better was then shee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Agreeing in bad will and cancred kynd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in bad maner they did disagree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For what so Envie good or bad did fynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She did conceale, and murder her owne mynd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But this, what ever evill she conceived,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did spred abroad and throw in th'open wynd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet this in all her words might be perceived,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all she sought was mens good name to have bereaved.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For, whatsoever good by any sayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or doen she heard, she would streightwayes invent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How to deprave or slaunderously upbrayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or to misconstrue of a mans intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And turne to ill the thing that well was ment:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore she used often to resort</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To common haunts, and companies frequent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hearke what any one did good report,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To blot the same with blame, or wrest in wicked sort.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And if that any ill she heard of any,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She would it eeke, and make much worse by telling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And take great joy to publish it to many,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That every matter worse was for her melling:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her name was hight Detraction, and her dwelling</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was neare to Envie, even her neighbour next;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A wicked hag, and Envy selfe excelling</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In mischiefe; for her selfe she onely vext,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But this same both her selfe and others eke perplext.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her face was ugly, and her mouth distort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Foming with poyson round about her gils,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which her cursed tongue, full sharpe and short,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Appear'd like Aspis sting that closely kils,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or cruelly does wound whom so she wils:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A distaffe in her other hand she had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the which she litle spinnes, but spils;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And faynes to weave false tales and leasings bad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To throw amongst the good which others had disprad.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>These two now had themselves combynd in one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And linckt together gainst Sir Artegall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For whom they wayted as his mortall fone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How they might make him into mischiefe fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For freeing from their snares Irena thrall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besides, unto themselves they gotten had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A monster, which the Blatant Beast men call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A dreadfull feend, of gods and men ydrad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom they by slights allur'd, and to their purpose lad.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such were these Hags, and so unhandsome drest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who when they nigh approching had espyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir Artegall, return'd from his late quest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They both arose, and at him loudly cryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As it had bene two shepheards curres had scryde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A ravenous Wolfe amongst the scattered flockes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Envie first, as she that first him eyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Towardes him runs, and, with rude flaring lockes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About her eares, does beat her brest and forhead knockes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then from her mouth the gobbet she does take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which whyleare she was so greedily</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Devouring, even that halfe-gnawen snake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at him throwes it most despightfully:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cursed Serpent, though she hungrily</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Earst chawd thereon, yet was not all so dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that some life remayned secretly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, as he past afore withouten dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bit him behind, that long the marke was to be read.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then th'other comming neare gan him revile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fouly rayle with all she could invent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saying that he had, with unmanly guile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And foule abusion, both his honour blent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that bright sword, the sword of Justice lent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had stayned with reprochfull crueltie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In guiltlesse blood of many an innocent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As for Grandtorto, him with treacherie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And traynes having surpriz'd, he fouly did to die.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereto the Blatant Beast, by them set on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At him began aloud to barke and bay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With bitter rage and fell contention,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the woods and rockes nigh to that way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began to quake and tremble with dismay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the aire rebellowed againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So dreadfully his hundred tongues did bray:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evermore those hags them selves did paine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sharpen him, and their owne cursed tongs did straine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And still among most bitter wordes they spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most shamefull, most unrighteous, most untrew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they the mildest man alive would make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forget his patience, and yeeld vengeaunce dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To her, that so false sclaunders at him threw:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And more, to make them pierce and wound more deepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She with the sting which in her vile tongue grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did sharpen them, and in fresh poyson steepe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet he past on, and seem'd of them to take no keepe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Talus, hearing her so lewdly raile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And speake so ill of him that well deserved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would her have chastiz'd with his yron flaile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If her Sir Artegall had not preserved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him forbidden, who his heast observed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So much the more at him still did she scold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stones did cast; yet he for nought would swerve</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From his right course, but still the way did hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Faerie Court; where what him fell shall else be told.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="book-6" epub:type="part z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Containing the Legend of Calidore, or of Courtesy</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="book-6-prologue" epub:type="prologue">
				<p>
					<span>The waies, through which my weary steps I guyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In this delightfull land of Faery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are so exceeding spacious and wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sprinckled with such sweet variety</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all that pleasant is to eare or eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I, nigh ravisht with rare thoughts delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My tedious travell doe forget thereby;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, when I gin to feele decay of might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It strength to me supplies, and chears my dulled spright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such secret comfort and such heavenly pleasures,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye sacred imps, that on Parnasso dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there the keeping have of learnings threasures</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which doe all worldly riches farre excell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the mindes of mortall men doe well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And goodly fury into them infuse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Guyde ye my footing, and conduct me well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In these strange waies where never foote did use,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne none can find but who was taught them by the Muse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Revele to me the sacred noursery</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of vertue, which with you doth there remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where it in silver bowre does hidden ly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From view of men, and wicked worlds disdaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since it at first was by the Gods with paine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Planted in earth, being derived at furst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From heavenly seedes of bounty soveraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by them long with carefull labour nurst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till it to ripenesse grew, and forth to honour burst.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Amongst them all growes not a fayrer flowre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then is the bloosme of comely courtesie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which though it on a lowly stalke doe bowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet brancheth forth in brave nobilitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And spreds it selfe through all civilitie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which though present age doe plenteous seeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, being matcht with plaine Antiquitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye will them all but fayned showes esteeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which carry colours faire that feeble eies misdeeme.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, in the triall of true curtesie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its now so farre from that which then it was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it indeed is nought but forgerie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fashion'd to please the eies of them that pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which see not perfect things but in a glas:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet is that glasse so gay, that it can blynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wisest sight to thinke gold that is bras;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But vertues seat is deepe within the mynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not in outward shows, but inward thoughts defynd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But where shall I in all Antiquity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So faire a patterne finde, where may be scene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The goodly praise of Princely curtesie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As in your selfe, O soveraine Lady Queene?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In whose pure minde, as in a mirrour sheene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It showes, and with her brightnesse doth inflame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The eyes of all which thereon fixed beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But meriteth indeede an higher name:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet so from low to high uplifted is your fame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then pardon me, most dreaded Soveraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from your selfe I doe this vertue bring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to your selfe doe it returne againe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So from the Ocean all rivers spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tribute backe repay as to their King:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right so from you all goodly vertues well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the rest which round about you ring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Lords and Ladies which about you dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And doe adorne your Court where courtesies excell.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Calidore saves from Maleffort</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A Damsell used vylde:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Doth vanquish Crudor; and doth make</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Brians wexe more mylde.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Of court, it seemes, men Courtesie doe call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that it there most useth to abound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And well beseemeth that in Princes hall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That vertue should be plentifully found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which of all goodly manners is the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And roote of civill conversation:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right so in Faery court it did redound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where curteous Knights and Ladies most did won</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all on earth, and made a matchlesse paragon.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But mongst them all was none more courteous Knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Calidore, beloved over-all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In whom, it seemes, that gentlenesse of spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And manners mylde were planted naturall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which he adding comely guize withall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gracious speach, did steale mens hearts away:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nathlesse thereto he was full stout and tall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And well approv'd in batteilous affray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That him did much renowme, and far his fame display.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nc was there Knight ne was there Lady found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Faery court, but him did deare embrace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For his faire usage and conditions sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which in all mcns liking gayned place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with the greatest purchast greatest giace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he could wisely use, and well apply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To please the best, and th'evill to embase;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he loathd leasing and base flattery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And loved simple truth and stedfast honesty.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now he was in travell on his way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uppon an hard adventure sore bestad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whenas by chaunce he met uppon a day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Artegall, returning yet halfe sad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From his late conquest which he gotten had:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who when as each of other had a sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They knew them selves, and both their persons rad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When Calidore thus first: "Haile, noblest Knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all this day on ground that breathen living spright!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Now tell, if please you, of the good successe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which ye have had in your late enterprize."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom Sir Artegall gan to expresse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His whole exploite and valorous emprize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In order as it did to him arize.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Now, happy man," (sayd then Sir Calidore)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Which have, so goodly as ye can devize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Atchiev'd so hard a quest, as few before;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That shall you most renowmed make for evermore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But where ye ended have, now I begin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tread an endlesse trace, withouten guyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or good direction how to enter in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or how to issue forth in waies untryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In perils strange, in labours long and wide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which although good Fortune me befall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet shall it not by none be testifyde."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"What is that quest," (quoth then Sir Artegall)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"That you into such perils presently doth call?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"The Blattant Beast" (quoth he) "I doe pursew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through the world incessantly doe chase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till I him overtake, or else subdew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet know I not or how, or in what place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To find him out, yet still I forward trace."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"What is that Blattant Beast?" (then he replide.)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"It is a Monster bred of hellishe race,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Then answered he) "which often hath annoyd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good Knights and Ladies true, and many else destroyd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Of Cerberus whilome he was begot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fell Chimaera, in her darkesome den,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through fowle commixture of his filthy blot;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where he was fostred long in Stygian fen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till he to perfect ripenesse grew; and then</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into this wicked world he forth was sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be the plague and scourge of wretched men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom with vile tongue and venemous intent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sore doth wound, and bite, and cruelly torment."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Then, since the salvage Island I did leave,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sayd Artegall, "I such a Beast did see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which did seeme a thousand tongues to have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all in spight and malice did agree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which he bayd and loudly barkt at mee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if that he attonce would me devoure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But I, that knew my selfe from perill free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did nought regard his malice nor his powre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he the more his wicked poyson forth did poure."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"That surely is that Beast" (saide Calidore)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Which I pursue, of whom I am right glad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To heare these tidings, which of none afore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through all my weary travell I have had;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet now some hope your words unto me add."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Now God you speed," (quoth then Sir Artegall)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"And keepe your body from the daunger drad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ye have much adoe to deale withall."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So both tooke goodly leave, and parted severall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sir Calidore thence travelled not long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When as by chaunce a comely Squire he found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That thorough some more mighty enemies wrong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both hand and foote unto a tree was bound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, seeing him from farre, with piteous sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his shrill cries him called to his aide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom approching, in that painefull stound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When he him saw, for no demaunds he staide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But first him losde, and afterwards thus to him saide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Unhappy Squire! what hard mishap thee brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into this bay of perill and disgrace?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What cruell hand thy wretched thraldome wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thee captyved in this shamefull place?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom he answered thus: "My haplesse case</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is not occasiond through my misdesert,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But through misfortune, which did me abase</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto this shame, and my young hope subvert,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere that I in her guilefull traines was well expert.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Not farre from hence, uppon yond rocky hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hard by a streight, there stands a castle strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which doth observe a custome lewd and ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And it hath long mayntaind with mighty wrong:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For may no Knight nor Lady passe along</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That way, (and yet they needs must passe that way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By reason of the streight, and rocks among)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But they that Ladies lockes doe shave away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that knights berd, for toll which they for passage pay."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"A shamefull use as ever I did heare,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sayd Calidore, "and to be overthrowne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by what meanes did they at first it reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for what cause? tell, if thou have it knowne."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sayd then that Squire; "The Lady, which doth owne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This Castle, is by name Briana hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then which a prouder Lady liveth none:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She long time hath deare lov'd a doughty Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sought to win his love by all the meanes she might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"His name is Crudor; who, through high disdaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And proud despight of his selfe-pleasing mynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Refused hath to yeeld her love againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill a Mantle she for him doe fynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With beards of Knights and locks of Ladies lynd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to provide she hath this Castle dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therein hath a Seneschall assynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cald M aleffort, a man of mickle might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who executes her wicked will with worse despight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"He, this same day, as I that way did come</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a faire Damzell, my beloved deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In execution of her lawlesse doome</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did set uppon us flying both for feare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For little bootes against him hand to reare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me first he tooke unhable to withstond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And whiles he her pursued every where,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till his returne unto this tree he bond;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne wote I surely whether her he yet have fond."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus whiles they spake they heard a ruefull shrieke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of one loud crying, which they streightway ghest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it was she the which for helpe did seeke.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, looking up unto the cry to lest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They saw that Carle from farre, with hand unblest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hayling that mayden by the yellow heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all her garments from her snowy brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from her head her lockes he nigh did teare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne would he spare for pitty, nor refraine for feare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which haynous sight when Calidore beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones he loosd that Squire, and so him left</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hearts dismay and inward dolour queld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For to pursue that villaine, which had reft</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That piteous spoile by so injurious theft;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom overtaking, loude to him he cryde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Leave, faytor, quickely that misgotten weft</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To him that hath it better justify de,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And turne thee soone to him of whom thou art defyde."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who, hearkning to that voice, him selfe upreard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seeing him so fiercely towardes make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against him stoutly ran, as nought afeard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But rather more enrag'd for those words sake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with sterne count'naunce thus unto him spake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Art thou the caytive that defyest me?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for this Mayd, whose party thou doest take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wilt give thy beard, though it but little bee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet shall it not her lockes for raunsome fro me free."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that he fiercely at him flew, and layd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On hideous strokes with most importune might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That oft he made him stagger as unstayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oft recuile to shunne his sharpe despight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Calidore, that was well skild in fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him long forbore, and still his spirite spar'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lying in waite how him he damadge might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when he felt him shrinke, and come to ward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He greater grew, and gan to drive at him more hard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like as a water-streame, whose swelling sourse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall drive a Mill, within strong bancks is pent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And long restrayned of his ready course,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So soone as passage is unto him lent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Break es forth, and makes his way more violent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such was the fury of Sir Calidore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When once he felt his foeman to relent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He fiercely him pursu'd, and pressed sore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who as he still decayd so he encreased more.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The heavy burden of whose dreadfull might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whenas the Carle no longer could sustaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His heart gan faint, and streight he tooke his flight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Toward the Castle, where, if need constraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His hope of refuge used to remaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom Calidore perceiving fast to flie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He him pursu'd and chaced through the plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he for dread of death gan loude to crie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the ward to open to him hastilie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They, from the wall him seeing so aghast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gate soone opened to receive him in;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Calidore did follow him so fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That even in the Porch he him did win,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cleft his head asunder to his chin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The carkasse tumbling downe within the dore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did choke the entraunce with a lumpe of sin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it could not be shut; whilest Calidore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did enter in, and slew the Porter on the flore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that the rest the which the Castle kept</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About him flockt, and hard at him did lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he them all from him full lightly swept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As doth a Steare, in heat of sommers day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his long taile the bryzes brush away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence passing forth into the hall he came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where of the Lady selfe in sad dismay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He was ymett, who with uncomely shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gan him salute, and fowle upbrayd with faulty blame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"False traytor Knight!" (said she) "no Knight at all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But scorne of armes, that hast with guilty hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Murdred my men, and slaine my Seneschall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now comest thou to rob my house unmand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And spoile my selfe that can not thee withstand?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet doubt thou not, but that some better Knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then thou, that shall thy treason understand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will it avenge, and pay thee with thy right;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if none do, yet shame shal thee with shame requight."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Much was the Knight abashed at that word;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet answer'd thus: "Not unto me the shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to the shamefull doer it afford.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bloud is no blemish, for it is no blame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To punish those that doe deserve the same;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But they that breake bands of civilitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wicked customes make, those doe defame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both noble armes and gentle curtesie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No greater shame to man then inhumanitie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Then doe your selfe, for dread of shame, forgoe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This evill manner which ye here maintaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doe instead thereof mild curt'sie showe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To all that passe: That shall you glory gaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More then his love, which thus ye seeke t'obtaine."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith all full of wrath she thus replyde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Vile recreant! know that I doe much disdaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy courteous lore, that doest my love deride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who scornes thy ydle scoffe, and bids thee be defyde."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"To take defiaunce at a Ladies word"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Quoth he) "I hold it no indignity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But were he here, that would it with his sword</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abett, perhaps he mote it deare aby."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Cowherd!" (quoth she) "were not that thou wouldst fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere he doe come, he should be soone in place."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"If I doe so," (sayd he) "then liberty</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I leave to you for aye me to disgrace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all those shames, that erst ye spake me to deface."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that a Dwarfe she cald to her in hast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And taking from her hand a ring of gould,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A privy token which betweene them past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bad him to flie with all the speed he could</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Crudor; and desire him that he would</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vouchsafe to reskue her against a Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who through strong powre had now her self in hould,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having late slaine her Seneschall in fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all her people murdred with outragious might:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Dwarfe his way did hast, and went all night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Calidore did with her there abyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The comming of that so much threatned Knight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where that discourteous Dame with scornfull pryde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fowle entreaty him indignifyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That yron heart it hardly could sustaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet he, that could his wrath full wisely guyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did well endure her womanish disdaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And did him selfe from fraile impatience refraine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The morrow next, before the lampe of light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above the earth upreard his flaming head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Dwarfe, which bore that message to her knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Brought aunswere backe, that ere he tasted bread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He would her succour, and alive or dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her foe deliver up into her hand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore he wild her doe away all dread;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, that of him she mote assured stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sent to her his basenet as a faithfull band.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereof full blyth the Lady streight became,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gan t'augment her bitternesse much more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet no whit more appalled for the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought dismayed was Sir Calidore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But rather did more chearefull seeme therefore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And having soone his armes about him dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did issue forth to meete his foe afore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where long he stayed not, when as a Knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He spide come pricking on with all his powre and might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Well weend he streight that he should be the same</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which tooke in hand her quarrell to maintaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne stayd to aske if it were he by name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But coucht his speare, and ran at him amaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They bene ymett in middest of the plaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With so fell fury and dispiteous forse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That neither could the others stroke sustaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But rudely rowld to ground, both man and horse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Neither of other taking pitty nor remorse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Calidore uprose againe full light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles yet his foe lay fast in sencelesse swound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet would he not him hurt although he might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For shame he weend a sleeping wight to wound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when Briana saw that drery stound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There where she stood uppon the Castle wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She deem'd him sure to have bene dead on ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made such piteous mourning therewithall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That from the battlements she ready seem'd to fall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nathlesse at length him selfe he did upreare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In lustlesse wise; as if against his will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere he had slept his fill, he wakened were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gan to stretch his limbs; which feeling ill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his late fall, awhile he rested still:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when he saw his foe before in vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He shooke off luskishnesse; and courage chill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kindling afresh, gan battell to renew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To prove if better foote then horsebacke would ensew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There then began a fearefull cruell fray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Betwixt them two for maystery of might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For both were wondrous practicke in that play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And passing well expert in single fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both inflam'd with furious despight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which as it still encreast, so still increast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their cruell strokes and terrible affright;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne once for ruth their rigour they releast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne once to breath awhile their angers tempest ceast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus long they trac'd and traverst to and fro,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tryde all waies how each mote entrance make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the life of his malignant foe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They hew'd their helmes, and plates asunder brake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As they had potshares bene; for nought mote slake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their greedy vengeaunces but goary blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That at the last like to a purple lake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of bloudy gore congeal'd about them stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which from their riven sides forth gushed like a flood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At length it chaunst that both their hands on hie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At once did heave with all their powre and might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thinking the utmost of their force to trie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And prove the finall fortune of the fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Calidore, that was more quicke of sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And nimbler handed then his enemie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Prevented him before his stroke could light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on the helmet smote him formerlie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That made him stoupe to ground with meeke humilitie</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, ere he could recover foote againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He, following that faire advantage fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His stroke redoubled with such might and maine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That him upon the ground he groveling cast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And leaping to him light would have unlast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His Helme, to make unto his vengeance way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, seeing in what daunger he was plast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cryde out; "Ah mercie, Sir! doe me not slay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But save my life, which lot before your foot doth lay."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that his mortall hand a while he stayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, having somewhat calm'd his wrathfull heat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With goodly patience, thus he to him sayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"And is the boast of that proud Ladies threat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That menaced me from the field to beat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now brought to this? By this now may ye learne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strangers no more so rudely to entreat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But put away proud looke and usage sterne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which shal nought to you but foule dishonor yearne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"For nothing is more blamefull to a knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That court'sie doth as well as armes professe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">However strong and fortunate in fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then the reproch of pride and cruelnesse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In vaine he seeketh others to suppresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who hath not learnd him selfe first to subdew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All flesh is frayle and full of ficklenesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Subject to fortunes chance, still chaunging new:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What haps to day to me to morrow may to you.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Who will not mercie unto others shew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How can he mercy ever hope to have?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To pay each with his owne is right and dew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet since ye mercie now doe need to crave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I will it graunt, your hopelesse life to save,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With these conditions which I will propound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First, that ye better shall your selfe behave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto all errant knights, whereso on ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Next, that ye Ladies ayde in every stead and stound."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The wretched man, that all this while did dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In dread of death, his heasts did gladly heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And promist to performe his precept well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And whatsoever else he would requere.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So, suffring him to rise, he made him sweare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By his owne sword, and by the crosse thereon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To take Briana for his loving fere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withouten dowre or composition;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to release his former foule condition.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All which accepting, and with faithfull oth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bynding himselfe most firmely to obay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He up arose, however liefe or loth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And swore to him true fealtie for aye.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then forth he cald from sorrowfull dismay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sad Briana which all this beheld;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who comming forth yet full of late affray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir Calidore upcheard, and to her teld</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All this accord to which he Cruder had compeld.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whereof she now more glad then sory earst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All overcome with infinite affect</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For his exceeding courtesie, that pearst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her stubborne hart with inward deepe effect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before his feet her selfe she did project;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him adoring as her lives deare Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all due thankes and dutifull respect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her selfe acknowledg'd bound for that accord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By which he had to her both life and love restord.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So all returning to the Castle glad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most joyfully she them did entertaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where goodly glee and feast to them she made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To show her thankefull mind and meaning faine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By all the meanes she mote it best explaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, after all, unto Sir Calidore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She freely gave that Castle for his paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her selfe bound to him for evermore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So wondrously now chaung'd from that she was afore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Calidore himselfe would not retaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor land nor fee for hyre of his good deede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But gave them streight unto that Squire againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom from her Seneschall he lately freed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to his damzell, as their rightfull meed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For recompence of all their former wrong.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There he remaind with them right well agreed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till of his wounds he wexed hole and strong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then to his first quest he passed forth along.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Calidore sees young Tristram slay</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A proud discourteous Knight:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He makes him Squire, and of him learnes</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">His state and present plight.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>What vertue is so fitting for a knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or for a Ladie whom a knight should love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Curtesie; to beare themselves aright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To all of each degree as doth behove?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For whether they be placed high above</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or low beneath, yet ought they well to know</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their good; that none them rightly may reprove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of rudenesse for not yeelding what they owe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great skill it is such duties timely to bestow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereto great helpe dame Nature selfe doth lend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For some so goodly gratious are by kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That every action doth them much commend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the eyes of men great liking find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which others that have greater skill in mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though they enforce themselves, cannot attaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For everie thing to which one is inclin'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth best become and greatest grace doth gaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet praise likewise deserve good thewes enforst with paine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That well in courteous Calidore appeares;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose every deed and word, that he did say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was like enchantment, that through both the eares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both the eyes did steale the hart away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He now againe is on his former way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To follow his first quest, when as he spyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A tall young man, from thence not farre away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fighting on foot, as well he him descryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against an armed knight that did on horsebacke ryde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And them beside a Ladie faire he saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Standing alone on foot in foule array;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom himselfe he hastily did draw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet the cause of so uncomely fray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to depart them, if so be he may:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, ere he came in place, that youth had kild</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That armed knight, that low on ground he lay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when he saw, his hart was inly child</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With great amazement, and his thought with wonder fild.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Him stedfastly he markt, and saw to bee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A goodly youth of amiable grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet but a slender slip, that scarse did see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet seventeene yeares, but tall and faire of face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sure he deem'd him borne of noble race:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All in a woodmans jacket he was clad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Lincolne greene, belayd with silver lace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on his head an hood with aglets sprad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by his side his hunters home he hanging had.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Buskins he wore of costliest cordwayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pinckt upon gold, and paled part per part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As then the guize was for each gentle swayne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his right hand he held a trembling dart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose fellow he before had sent apart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his left he held a sharpe bore-speare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which he wont to launch the salvage hart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of many a Lyon and of many a Beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That first unto his hand in chase did happen neare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom Calidore awhile well having vewed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At length bespake; "What meanes this, gentle Swaine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why hath thy hand too bold it selfe embrewed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In blood of knight, the which by thee is slaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By thee no knight; which armes impugneth plaine?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Certes," (said he) "loth were I to have broken</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The law of armes: yet breake it should againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rather then let my selfe of wight be stroken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So long as these two armes were able to be wroken.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"For not I him, as this his Ladie here</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May witnesse well, did offer first to wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne surely thus unarm'd I likely were;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he me first through pride and puissance strong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Assayld, not knowing what to armes doth long."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Perdie great blame" (then said Sir Calidore)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"For armed knight a wight unarm'd to wrong:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But then aread, thou gentle chyld, wherefore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Betwixt you two began this strife and sterne uprore."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"That shall I, sooth," (said he) "to you declare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I, whose unryper yeares are yet unfit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thing of weight or worke of greater care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe spend my dayes and bend my carelesse wit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To salvage chace, where I thereon may hit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In all this forrest and wyld wooddie raine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where, as this day I was enraunging it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I chaunst to meete this knight, who there lyes slaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Together with this Ladie, passing on the plaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"The knight, as ye did see, on horsebacke was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And this his Ladie (that him ill became)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On her faire feet by his horse side did pas</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through thicke and thin, unfit for any Dame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet not content, more to increase his shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When so she lagged, as she needs mote so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He with his speare, that was to him great blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would thumpe her forward and inforce to goe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weeping to him in vaine and making piteous woe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Which when I saw, as they me passed by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much was I moved in indignant mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gan to blame him for such cruelty</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Towards a Ladie, whom with usage kind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He rather should have taken up behind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith he wroth, and full of proud disdaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tooke in foule scorne that I such fault did find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And me in lieu thereof revil'd againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Threatning to chastize me, as doth t'a chyld pertaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Which I no lesse disdayning, backe returned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His scornefull taunts unto his teeth againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he streightway with haughtie choler burned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his speare strooke me one stroke or twaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which I, enforst to beare though to my paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cast to requite; and with a slender dart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fellow of this I beare, throwne not in vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strooke him, as seemeth, underneath the hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That through the wound his spirit shortly did depart."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Much did Sir Calidore admyre his speach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tempred so well, but more admyr'd the stroke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That through the mayles had made so strong a breach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into his hart, and had so sternely wroke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His wrath on him that first occasion broke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet rested not, but further gan inquire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that same Ladie, whether what he spoke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were soothly so, and that th'unrighteous ire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of her owne knight had given him his owne due hire?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Of all which when as she could nought deny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But cleard that stripling of th'imputed blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sayd then Sir Calidore; "Neither will I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him charge with guilt, but rather doe quite clame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For what he spake, for you he spake it, Dame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And what he did, he did him selfe to save:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against both which that knight wrought knightlesse shame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For knights and all men this by nature have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Towards all womenkind them kindly to behave.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, sith that he is gone irrevocable,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Please it you, Ladie, to us to aread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What cause could make him so dishonourable</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To drive you so on foot, unfit to tread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lackey by him, gainst all womanhead."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Certes, Sir knight," (sayd she) "full loth I were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To rayse a lyving blame against the dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But since it me concernes my selfe to clere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will the truth discover as it chaunst whylere.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"This day, as he and I together roade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon our way to which we weren bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We chaunst to come foreby a covert glade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within a wood, whereas a Ladie gent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sate with a knight in joyous jolliment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of their franke loves, free from all gealous spyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire was the Ladie, sure, that mote content</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An hart not carried with too curious eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And unto him did shew all lovely courtesyes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Whom when my knight did see so lovely faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He inly gan her lover to envy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wish that he part of his spoyle might share:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereto when as my presence he did spy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be a let, he bad me by and by</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For to alight: but when as I was loth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My loves owne part to leave so suddenly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He with strong hand downe from his steed me throw'th</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with presumpteous powre against that knight streight go'th.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Unarm'd all was the knight, as then more meete</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Ladies service, and for loves delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then fearing any foeman there to meete:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof he taking oddes, streight bids him dight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himselfe to yeeld his Love, or else to fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat the other starting up dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet boldly answer'd, as he rightly might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To leave his love he should be ill apayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which he had good right gaynst all that it gainesayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Yet since he was not presently in plight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her to defend, or his to justifie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He him requested, as he was a knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To lend him day his better right to trie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or stay till he his armes, which were thereby,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might lightly fetch: But he was fierce and whot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne time would give, nor any termes aby,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But at him flew, and with his speare him smot;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From which to thinke to save himselfe it booted not.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Meane while his Ladie, which his outrage saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilest they together for the quarrey strove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the covert did her selfe withdraw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And closely hid her selfe within the grove.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My knight hers soone, as seemes, to daunger drove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And left sore wounded: but, when her he mist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He woxe halfe mad; and in that rage gan rove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And range through all the wood, where so he wist</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She hidden was, and sought her so long as him list.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But, when as her he by no meanes could find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After long search and chauff he turned backe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the place where me he left behind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There gan he me to curse and ban, for lacke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that faire bootie, and with bitter wracke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wreake on me the guilt of his owne wrong:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all which I yet glad to beare the packe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strove to appease him, and perswaded long;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But still his passion grew more violent and strong.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Then, as it were t'avenge his wrath on mee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When forward we should fare he flat refused</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To take me up (as this young man did see)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his steed, for no just cause accused,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But forst to trot on foot, and foule misused,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pounching me with the butt end of his speare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In vaine complayning to be so abused;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he regarded neither playnt nor teare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But more enforst my paine, the more my plaints to heare,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"So passed we till this young man us met;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And being moov'd with pittie of my plight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spake, as was meet, for ease of my regret:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof befell what now is in your sight."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Now sure," (then said Sir Calidore) "and right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me seemes, that him befell by his owne fault:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who ever thinkes through confidence of might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or through support of count'nance proud and hault,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wrong the weaker, oft falles in his owne assault."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then turning: backe unto that gentle boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which had himselfe so stoutly well acquit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeing his face so lovely sterne and coy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hearing th'answeres of his pregnant wit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He praysd it much, and much admyred it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sure he weend him borne of noble blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With whom those graces did so goodly fit:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when he long had him beholding stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He burst into these wordes, as to him seemed good:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Faire gentle swayne, and yet as stout as fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in these woods amongst the Nymphs dost wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which daily may to thy sweete lookes repayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As they are wont unto Latonaes sonne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After his chace on woodie Cynthus donne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well may I, certes, such an one thee read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As by thy worth thou worthily hast wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or surely borne of some Heroicke sead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in thy face appeares and gratious goodlyhead.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But, should it not displease thee it to tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Unlesse thou in these woods thy selfe conceale</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For love amongst the woodie Gods to dwell)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I would thy selfe require thee to reveale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For deare affection and unfayned zeale</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to thy noble personage I beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wish thee grow in worship and great weale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, since the day that armes I first did reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I never saw in any greater hope appeare."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom then thus the noble Youth: "May be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir knight, that, by discovering my estate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Harme may arise unweeting unto me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nathelesse, sith ye so courteous seemed late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To you I will not feare it to relate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then wote ye that I am a Briton borne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sonne of a King, (how ever thorough fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or fortune I my countrie have forlorne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lost the crowne which should my head by right adorne,)</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And Tristram is my name, the onely heire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of good king Meliogras which did rayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Cornewale, till that he through lives despeire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untimely dyde, before I did attaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ripe yeares of reason my right to maintaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After whose death his brother, seeing mee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An infant, weake a kingdome to sustaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon him tooke the roiall high degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sent me, where him list, instructed for to bee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"The widow Queene my mother, which then hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Emiline, conceiving then great feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of my fraile safetie, resting in the might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of him that did the kingly Scepter beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose gealous dread induring not a peare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is wont to cut off all that doubt may breed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thought best away me to remove somewhere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into some forrein land, where as no need</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of dreaded daunger might his doubtfull humor feed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"So, taking counsell of a wise man red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She was by him adviz'd to send me quight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the countrie wherein I was bred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which the fertile Lionesse is hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the land of Faerie, where no wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should weet of me, nor worke me any wrong:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whose wise read she hearkning sent me streight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into this land, where I have wond thus long</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since I was ten yeares old, now growen to stature strong.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"All which my daies I have not lewdly spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor spilt the blossome of my tender yeares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In ydlesse; but, as was convenient,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have trayned bene with many noble feres</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In gentle thewes and such like seemly leres:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst which my most delight hath alwaies been</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hunt the salvage chace, amongst my peres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all that raungeth in the forrest greene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which none is to me unknowne that ev'r was scene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ne is there hauke which mantleth her on pearch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether high towring or accoasting low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But I the measure of her flight doe search,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all her pray and all her diet know.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such be our joy es which in these forrests grow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Onely the use of armes, which most I joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fitteth most for noble swayne to know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I have not tasted yet; yet past a boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And being now high time these strong joynts to imploy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Therefore, good Sir, sith now occasion fit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth fall, whose like hereafter seldome may,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let me this crave, unworthy though of it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ye will make me Squire without delay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from henceforth in batteilous array</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I may beare armes, and learne to use them right;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rather, since that fortune hath this day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Given to me the spoile of this dead knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These goodly gilden armes which I have won in fight."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All which when well Sir Calidore had heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him much more now then earst he gan admire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the rare hope which in his yeares appear'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thus replide: "Faire chyld, the high desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To love of armes, which in you doth aspire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I may not, certes, without blame denie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But rather wish that some more noble hire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Though none more noble then is chevalrie)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I had, you to reward with greater dignitie."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There him he causd to kneele, and made to sweare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faith to his knight, and truth to Ladies all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And never to be recreant for feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of perill, or of ought that might befall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So he him dubbed, and his Squire did call.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full glad and joyous then young Tristram grew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as a flowre, whose silken leaves small</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long shut up in the bud from heavens vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At length breakes forth, and brode displayes his smyling hew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus when they lone had treated to and fro,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Calidore betooke him to depart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Chyld Tristram prayd that he with him might goe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On his adventure, vowing not to start,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wayt on him in every place and part:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat Sir Calidore did much delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And greatly joy'd at his so noble hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hope he sure would prove a doughtie knight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet for the time this answere he to him behight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Glad would I surely be, thou courteous Squire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To have thy presence in my present quest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That mote thy kindled courage set on fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And flame forth honour in thy noble brest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But I am bound by vow, which I profest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To my dread Soveraine, when I it assayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in atchievement of her high behest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I should no creature joyne unto mine ayde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For-thy I may not graunt that ye so greatly prayde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But since this Ladie is all desolate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And needeth safegard now upon her way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye may doe well, in this her needfull state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To succour her from daunger of dismay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That thankfull guerdon may to you repay."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The noble ympe, of such new service fayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It gladly did accept, as he did say:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So taking courteous leave they parted twayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Calidore forth passed to his former payne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Tristram, then despoyling that dead knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all those goodly implements of prayse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long fed his greedie eyes with the faire sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the bright mettall shyning like Sunne rayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Handling and turning them a thousand wayes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, after having them upon him dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He tooke that Ladie, and her up did rayse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the steed of her owne late dead knight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So with her marched forth, as she did him behight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There to their fortune leave we them awhile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And turne we backe to good Sir Calidore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, ere he thence had traveild many a mile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came to the place whereas ye heard afore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This knight, whom Tristram slew, had wounded sore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another knight in his despiteous pryde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There he that knight found lying on the flore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With many wounds full perilous and wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all his garments and the grasse in vermeill dyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And there beside him sate upon the ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His wofull Ladie, piteously complayning</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With loud laments that most unluckie stound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her sad selfe with carefull hand constrayning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wype his wounds, and ease their bitter payning.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which sorie sight when Calidore did vew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With heavie eyne, from teares uneath refrayning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mightie hart their mournefull case can rew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for their better comfort to them nigher drew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then speaking to the Ladie thus he said:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ye dolefull Dame, let not your griefe empeach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tell what cruell hand hath thus arayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This knight unarm'd with so unknightly breach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of armes, that, if I yet him nigh may reach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I may avenge him of so foule despight."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Ladie, hearing his so courteous speach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan reare her eyes as to the chearefull light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from her sory hart few heavie words forth sight:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In which she shew'd, how that discourteous knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Whom Tristram slew) them in that shadow found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Joying together in unblam'd delight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him unarm'd, as now he lay on ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Charg'd with his speare, and mortally did wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withouten cause, but onely her to reave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From him to whom she was for ever bound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet when she fled into that covert greave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He, her not finding, both them thus nigh dead did leave.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When Calidore this ruefull storie had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well understood, he gan of her demand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What manner wight he was, and how yclad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which had this outrage wrought with wicked hand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She then, like as she best could understand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him thus describ'd; to be of stature large,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Clad all in gilden armes, with azure band</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quartred athwart, and bearing in his targe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Ladie on rough waves row'd in a sommer barge.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then gan Sir Calidore to ghesse streightway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By many signes which she described had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That this was he whom Tristram earst did slay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to her said: "Dame, be no longer sad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he, that hath your Knight so ill bestad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is now him selfe in much more wretched plight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These eyes him saw upon the cold earth sprad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The meede of his desert for that despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which to your selfe he wrought and to your loved knight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Therefore, faire Lady, lay aside this griefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which ye have gathered to your gentle hart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that displeasure, and thinke what reliefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were best devise for this your lovers smart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And how ye may him hence, and to what part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Convay to be recur'd." She thankt him deare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both for that newes he did to her impart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for the courteous care which he did beare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both to her love and to her selfe in that sad dreare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet could she not devise by any wit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How thence she might convay him to some place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For him to trouble she it thought unfit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was a straunger to her wretched case;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him to beare she thought it thing too base.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when as he perceiv'd he thus bespake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Faire Lady, let it not you seeme disgrace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To beare this burden on your dainty backe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My selfe will beare a part, coportion of your packe."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So off he did his shield, and downeward layd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the ground, like to an hollow beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And powring balme, which he had long purvayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into his wounds, him up thereon did reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And twixt them both with parted paines did beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Twixt life and death, not knowing what was donne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence they him carried to a Castle neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which a worthy auncient Knight did wonne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where what ensu'd shall in next Canto be begonne.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-3" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Calidore brings Priscilla home;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Pursues the Blatant Beast:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Saves Serena, whilest Calepine</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">By Turpine is opprest.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>True is, that whilome that good Poet sayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gentle minde by gentle deeds is knowne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For a man by nothing is so well bewrayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As by his manners; in which plaine is showne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of what degree and what race he is growne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For seldome scene a trotting Stalion get</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An ambling Colt, that is his proper owne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So seldome scene that one in basenesse set</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth noble courage shew with curteous manners met.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But evermore contrary hath bene tryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That gentle bloud will gentle manners breed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As well may be in Calidore descryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By late ensample of that courteous deed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Done to that wounded Knight in his great need,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom on his backe he bore, till he him brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the Castle where they had decreed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There of the Knight, the which that Castle ought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make abode that night he greatly was besought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He was to weete a man of full ripe yeares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in his youth had beene of mickle might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And borne great sway in armes amongst his peares;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But now weake age had dimd his candle-light:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was he courteous still to every wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And loved all that did to armes incline;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And was the Father of that wounded Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom Calidore thus carried on his chine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Aldus was his name; and his sonnes, Aladine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who when he saw his sonne so ill bedight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With bleeding wounds, brought home upon a beare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By a faire Lady and a straunger Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was inly touched with compassion deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And deare affection of so dolefull dreare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he these words burst forth: "Ah, sory boy!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is this the hope that to my hoary heare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou brings? aie me! is this the timely joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which I expected long, now turnd to sad annoy?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Such is the weakenesse of all mortall hope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So tickle is the state of earthly things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, ere they come unto their aymed scope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They fall too short of our fraile reckonings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bring us bale and bitter sorrowings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Instead of comfort which we should embrace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This is the state of Keasars and of Kings!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let none therefore, that is in meaner place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too greatly grieve at any his unlucky case."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So well and wisely did that good old Knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Temper his griefe, and turned it to cheare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To cheare his guests whom he had stayd that night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And make their welcome to them well appeare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to Sir Calidore was easie geare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that faire Lady would be cheard for nought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But sigh'd and sorrow'd for her lover deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And inly did afflict her pensive thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With thinking to what case her name should now be brought:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For she was daughter to a noble Lord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which dwelt thereby, who sought her to afry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To a great pere; but she did disaccord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne could her liking to his love apply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But lov'd this fresh young Knight who dwelt her ny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The lusty Aladine, though meaner borne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of lesse livelood and hability,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet full of valour the which did adorne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His meanesse much, and make her th'others riches scorne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So, having both found fit occasion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They met together in that lucklesse glade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where that proud Knight in his presumption</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gentle Aladine did earst invade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being unarm'd and set in secret shade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof she now bethinking, gan t'advize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How great a hazard she at earst had made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her good fame; and further gan devize</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How she the blame might salve with coloured disguize.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Calidore with all good courtesie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fain'd her to frolicke, and to put away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The pensive fit of her melancholic;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that old Knight by all meanes did assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make them both as merry as he may.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So they the evening past till time of rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When Calidore in seemly good array</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto his bowre was brought, and there undrest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did sleepe all night through weary travell of his quest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But faire Priscilla (so that Lady hight)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would to no bed, nor take no kindely sleepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by her wounded love did watch all night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the night for bitter anguish weepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with her teares his wounds did wash and steepe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So well she washt them, and so well she wacht him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of the deadly swound, in which full deepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He drenched was, she at the length dispacht him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drove away the stound which mortally attacht him.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The morrow next, when day gan to uplooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He also gan uplooke with drery eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like one that out of deadly dreame awooke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where when he saw his faire Priscilla by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He deepely sigh'd, and groaned inwardly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To thinke of this ill state in which she stood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which she for his sake had weetingly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now brought her selfe, and blam'd her noble blood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For first, next after life, he tendered her good.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which she perceiving did with plenteous teares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His care more then her owne compassionate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">rorgethill of her owne to mmde his feares:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So both conspiring gan to intimate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each others griefe with zeale affectionate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And twixt them twaine with equall care to cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How to save hole her hazarded estate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which the onely helpe now left them last</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seem'd to be Calidore: all other helpes were past.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Him they did deeme, as sure to them he seemed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A courteous Knight and full of faithfull trust;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore to him their cause they best esteemed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whole to commit, and to his dealing just.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Earely, so soone as Titans beames forth brust</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through the thicke clouds in which they steeped lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All night in darkenesse, duld with yron rust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Calidore rising up as fresh as day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gan freshly him addresse unto his former way.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But first him seemed fit that wounded Knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To visite, after this nights perillous passe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to salute him, if he were in plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke that Lady, his faire lovely lasse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There he him found much better then he was;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And moved speach to him of things of course,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The anguish of his paine to overpasse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst which he namely did to him discourse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of former daies mishap, his sorrowes wicked sourse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Of which occasion Aldine taking hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan breake to him the fortunes of his love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all his disadventures to unfold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Calidore it dearly deepe did move:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In th'end, his kyndly courtesie to prove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He him by all the bands of love besought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as it mote a faithfull friend behove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To safe-conduct his love, and not for ought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To leave, till to her fathers house he had her brought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sir Calidore his faith thereto did plight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It to performe: so after little stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she her selfe had to the journey dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He passed forth with her in faire array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fearlesse who ought did thinke or ought did say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith his own thought he knew most cleare from wite</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So, as they past together on their way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He can devize this counter-cast of slight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To give faire colour to that Ladies cause in sight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Streight to the carkasse of that Knight he went-,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cause of all this evill, who was slaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The day before by just avengement</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of noble Tristram, where it did remaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There he the necke thereof did cut in twaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tooke with him the head, the signe of shame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So forth he passed thorough that daies paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till to that Ladies fathers house he came;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most pensive man, through feare what of his childe became.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There he arriving boldly did present</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fearefull Lady to her father deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most perfect pure, and guiltlesse innocent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of blame, as he did on his Knighthood sweare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since first he saw her, and did free from feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of a discourteous Knight, who her had reft</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by outragious force away did beare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Witnesse thereof he shew'd his head there left,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wretched life forlorne for vengement of his theft.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Most joyfull man her sire was her to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heare th'adventure of her late mischaunce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thousand thankes to Calidore for fee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his large paines in her deliveraunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did yeeld: Ne lesse the Lady did advaunce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus having her restored trustily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he had vow'd, some small continuance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He there did make, and then most carefully</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto his first exploite he did him selfe apply.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So, as he was pursuing of his quest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He chaunst to come whereas a jolly Knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In covert shade him selfe did safely rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To solace with his Lady in delight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His warlike armes he had from him undight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that him selfe he thought from daunger free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And far from envious eyes that mote him spight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the Lady was full faire to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And courteous withall, becomming her degree.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom Sir Calidore approaching nye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere they were well aware of living wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them much abasht, but more him selfe thereby,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he so rudely did uppon them light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And troubled had their quiet loves delight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet since it was his fortune, not his fault,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him selfe thereof he labour'd to acquite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pardon crav'd for his so rash default,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he gainst courtesie so fowly did default.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With which his gentle words and goodly wit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He soone allayd that Knights conceiv'd displeasure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he besought him downe by him to sit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they mote treat of things abrode at leasure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of adventures, which had in his measure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of so long waies to him befallen late.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So downe he sate, and with delightfull pleasure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His long adventures gan to him relate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which he endured had through daungerous debate:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Of which whitest they discoursed both together,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The faire Serena (so his Lady hight)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Allur'd with myldnesse of the gentle wether</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pleasaunce of the place, the which was dight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With divers flowres distinct with rare delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wandred about the fields, as liking led</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her wavering lust after her wandring sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make a garland to adorne her hed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without suspect of ill or daungers hidden dred.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All sodainely out of the Forrest nere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Blatant Beast forth rushing unaware</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Caught her, thus loosely wandring here and there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his wide great mouth away her bare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Crying aloud to shew her sad misfare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the Knights, and calling oft for ayde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who with the horrour of her haplesse care</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hastily starting up, like men dismayde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ran after fast to reskue the distressed mayde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Beast, with their pursuit incited more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the wood was bearing her apace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For to have spoyled her, when Calidore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who was more light of foote and swift in chace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him overtooke in middest of his race;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, fiercely charging him with all his might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forst to forgoe his pray there in the place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to betake him selfe to fearefull flight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he durst not abide with Calidore to fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who nathelesse, when he the Lady saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There left on ground, though in full evill plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet knowing that her Knight now neare did draw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Staide not to succour her in that affright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But follow'd fast the Monster in his flight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through woods and hils he follow'd him so fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he nould let him breath, nor gather spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But forst him gape and gaspe, with dread aghast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if his lungs and lites were nigh asunder brast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now by this Sir Calepine (so hight)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came to the place where he his Lady found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In dolorous dismay and deadly plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All in gore bloud there tumbled on the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having both sides through grypt with griesly wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His weapons soone from him he threw away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stouping downe to her in drery swound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uprear'd her from the ground whereon she lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in his tender armes her forced up to stay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So well he did his busie paines apply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the faint sprite he did revoke againe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To her fraile mansion of mortality:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then up he tooke her twixt his armes twaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And setting on his steede her did sustaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With carefull hands, soft footing her beside;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till to some place of rest they mote attaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where she in safe assuraunce mote abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till she recured were of those her woundes wide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now when as Phoebus with his fiery waine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto his Inne began to draw apace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho wexing weary of that toylesome paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In travelling on foote so long a space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not wont on foote with heavy armes to trace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Downe in a dale forby a rivers syde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He chaunst to spie a faire and stately place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which he meant his weary steps to guyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In hope there for his love some succour to provyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, comming to the rivers side, he found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hardly passable on foote it was;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore there still he stood as in a stound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne wist which way he through the foord mote pas:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus whilest he was in this distressed case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Devising what to doe, he nigh espyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An armed Knight approaching to the place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a faire Lady lincked by his syde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which themselves prepard thorough the foord to ride.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom Calepine saluting (as became)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besought of courtesie, in that his neede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For safe conducting of his sickely Dame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through that same perillous foord with better heede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To take him up behinde upon his steed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom that other did this taunt returne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Perdy, thou peasant Knight mightst rightly reed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me then to be full base and evill borne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I would beare behinde a burden of such scorne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But, as thou hast thy steed forlorne with shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So fare on foote till thou another gayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And let thy Lady likewise doe the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or beare her on thy backe with pleasing payne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And prove thy manhood on the billowes vayne."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which rude speach his Lady much displeased</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did him reprove, yet could him not restrayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And would on her owne Palfrey him have eased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For pitty of his Dame whom she saw so diseased.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sir Calepine her thanckt; yet, inly wroth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against her Knight, her gentlenesse refused,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And carelesly into the river goth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As in despight to be so fowle abused</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of a rude churle, whom often he accused</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of fowle discourtesie, unfit for Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, strongly wading through the waves unused,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With speare in th'one hand stayd him selfe upright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With th'other staide his Lady up with steddy might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And all the while that same discourteous Knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stood on the further bancke beholding him;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At whose calamity, for more despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He laught, and mockt to see him like to swim:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when as Calepine came to the brim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saw his carriage past that perill well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Looking at that same Carle with count'nance grim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His heart with vengeaunce inwardly did swell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And forth at last did breake in speaches sharpe and fell</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Unknightly Knight, the blemish of that name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And blot of all that armes uppon them take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which is the badge of honour and of fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Loe! I defie thee; and here challenge make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That thou for ever doe those armes forsake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And be for ever held a recreant Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unlesse thou dare, for thy deare Ladies sake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for thine owne defence, on foote alight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To justifie thy fault gainst me in equall fight."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The dastard, that did heare him selfe defyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seem'd not to weigh his threatfull words at all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But laught them out, as if his greater pryde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did scorne the challenge of so base a thrall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or had no courage, or else had no gall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So much the more was Calepine offended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That him to no revenge he forth could call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But both his challenge and him selfe contemned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No cared as a coward so to be condemned.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But he, nought weighing what he sayd or did,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turned his steede about another way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his Lady to the Castle rid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where was his won: ne did the other stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But after went directly as he may,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For his sicke charge some harbour there to seeke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where he arriving with the fall of day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drew to the gate, and there with prayers meeke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And myld entreaty lodging did for her beseeke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But the rude Porter that no manners had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did shut the gate against him in his face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And entraunce boldly unto him forbad:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nathelesse the Knight, now in so needy case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan him entreat even with submission base,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And humbly praid to let them in that night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who to him aunswer'd, that there was no place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of lodging fit for any errant Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unlesse that with his Lord he formerly did fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Full loth am I," (quoth he) "as now at earst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When day is spent, and rest us needeth most,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that this Lady, both whose sides are pearst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With wounds, is ready to forgo the ghost;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne would I gladly combate with mine host,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That should to me such curtesie afford,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unlesse that I were thereunto enforst:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yet aread to me, how hight thy Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That doth thus strongly ward the Castle of the Ford?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"His name," (quoth he) "if that thou list to learne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is hight Sir Turpine, one of mickle might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And manhood rare, but terrible and stearne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In all assaies to every errant Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because of one that wrought him fowle despight."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"111 seemes," (sayd he) "if he so valiaunt be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he should be so sterne to stranger wight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For seldome yet did living creature see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That curtesie and manhood ever disagree.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But go thy waies to him, and fro me say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That here is at his gate an errant Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That house-rome craves; yet would be loth t'assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The proofe of battell now in doubtfull night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or curtesie with rudenesse to requite:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, if he needes will fight, crave leave till morne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tell with all the lamentable plight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which this Lady languisheth forlorne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That pitty craves, as he of woman was yborne."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The groome went streight way in, and to his Lord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Declar'd the message which that Knight did move:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, sitting with his Lady then at bord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not onely did not his demaund approve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But both himselfe revil'd and eke his love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Albe his Lady, that Blandina hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him of ungentle usage did reprove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And earnestly entreated, that they might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Finde favour to be lodged there for that same night.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet would he not perswaded be for ought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne from his currish will a whit reclame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which answer when the groome returning brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Calepine, his heart did inly flame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With wrathfull fury for so foule a shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he could not thereof avenged bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But most for pitty of his dearest Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom now in deadly daunger he did see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet had no meanes to comfort, nor procure her glee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But all in vaine; for-why no remedy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He saw the present mischiefe to redresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But th'utmost end perforce for to aby,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which that nights fortune would for him addresse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So downe he tooke his Lady in distresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And layd her underneath a bush to sleepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cover'd with cold, and wrapt in wretchednesse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles he him selfe all night did nought but weepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wary watch about her for her safegard keepe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The morrow next, so soone as joyous day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did shew it selfe in sunny beames bedight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Serena full of dolorous dismay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Twixt darkenesse dread and hope of living light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uprear'd her head to see that chearefull sight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Calepine, however inly wroth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And greedy to avenge that vile despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet for the feeble Ladies sake, full loth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make there lenger stay, forth on his journey goth.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He goth on foote all armed by her side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upstaying still her selfe uppon her steede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being unhable else alone to ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So sore her sides, so much her wounds did bleede;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that at length, in his extreamest neede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He chaunst far off an armed Knight to spy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pursuing him apace with greedy speede;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom well he wist to be some enemy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That meant to make advantage of his misery.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Wherefore he stayd, till that he nearer drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet what issue would thereof betyde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, whenas he approched nigh in vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By certaine signes he plainly him descryde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be the man that with such scornefull pryde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had him abusde and shamed yesterday;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore, misdoubting least he should misguyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His former malice to some new assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He cast to keepe him selfe so safely as he may.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By this the other came in place likewise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And couching close his speare and all his powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As bent to some malicious enterprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He bad him stand t'abide the bitter stoure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his sore vengeaunce, or to make avoure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the lewd words and deedes which he had done:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that ran at him, as he would devoure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His life attonce; who nought could do but shun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The perill of his pride, or else be over-run.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet he him still pursew'd from place to place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With full intent him cruelly to kill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And like a wilde goate round about did chace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flying the fury of his bloudy will:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But his best succour and refuge was still</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behind his Ladies back; who to him cryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And called oft with prayers loud and shrill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As ever he to Lady was affyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To spare her Knight, and rest with reason pacifyde:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But he the more thereby enraged was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with more eager felnesse him pursew'd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that at length, after long weary chace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having by chaunce a close advantage vew'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He over raught him, having long eschew'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His violence in vaine; and with his spere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strooke through his shoulder, that the blood ensew'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In great aboundance, as a well it were</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That forth out of an hill fresh gushing did appere.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet ceast he not for all that cruell wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But chaste him still for all his Ladies cry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not satisfyde till on the fatall ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He saw his life powrd forth despiteously;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which was certes in great jeopardy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had not a wondrous chaunce his reskue wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saved from his cruell villany.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such chaunces oft exceed all humaine thought!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in another Canto shall to end be brought.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-4" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Calepine by a Salvage Man</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">From Turpine reskewed is</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And whylest an Infant from a beare</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">He saves, his Love doth misse.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Like as a ship with dreadfull storme long tost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having spent all her mastes and her ground-hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now farre from harbour likely to be lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last some fisher-barke doth neare behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That giveth comfort to her courage cold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such was the state of this most courteous knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being oppressed by that faytour bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he remayned in most perilous plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his sad Ladie left in pitifull affright:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Till that, by fortune passing all foresight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A salvage man, which in those woods did wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drawne with that Ladies loud and piteous shright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Toward the same incessantly did ronne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To understand what there was to be donne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There he this most discourteous craven found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As fiercely yet as when he first begonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Chasing the gentle Calepine around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne sparing him the more for all his grievous wound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The salvage man, that never till this houre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did taste of pittie, neither gentlesse knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeing his sharpe assault and cruell stoure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was much emmoved at his perils vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That even his ruder hart began to rew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And feele compassion of his evill plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against his foe that did him so pursew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whom he meant to free him, if he might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And him avenge of that so villenous despight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet armes or weapon had he none to fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne knew the use of warlike instruments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save such as sudden rage him lent to smite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But naked, without needfull vestiments</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To clad his corpse with meete habiliments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He cared not for dint of sword nor speere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No more then for the stroke of strawes or bents:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For from his mothers wombe, which him did beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was invulnerable made by Magicke leare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He stayed not t'advize which way were best</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His foe t'assayle, or how himselfe to gard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with fierce fury and with force infest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon him ran; who being well prepard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His first assault full warily did ward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with the push of his sharp-pointed speare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full on the breast him strooke, so strong and hard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That forst him backe recoyle and reele areare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet in his bodie made no wound nor bloud appeare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that the wyld man more enraged grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to a Tygre that hath mist his pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with mad moode againe upon him flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Regarding neither speare that mote him slay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor his fierce steed that mote him much dismay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The salvage nation doth all dread despize:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho on his shield he griple hold did lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And held the same so hard, that by no wize</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He could him force to loose, or leave his enterprize.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Long did he wrest and wring it to and fro,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every way did try, but all in vaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he would not his greedie grype forgoe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But hayld and puld with all his might and maine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from his steed him nigh he drew againe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who having now no use of his long speare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So nigh at hand, nor force his shield to straine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both speare and shield, as things that needlesse were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He quite forsooke, and fled himselfe away for feare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But after him the wyld man ran apace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him pursewed with importune speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(For he was swift as any Bucke in chace)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, had he not in his extreamest need</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bene helped through the swiftnesse of his steed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He had him overtaken in his flight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, ever as he saw him nigh succeed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan cry aloud with horrible affright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shrieked out, a thing uncomely for a knight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, when the Salvage saw his labour vaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In following of him that fled so fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He wearie woxe, and backe return'd againe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With speede unto the place, whereas he last</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had left that couple nere their utmost cast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There he that knight full sorely bleeding found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the Ladie fearefully aghast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both for the perill of the present stound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And also for the sharpnesse of her rankling wound:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For though she were right glad so rid to bee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From that vile lozell which her late offended;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet now no lesse encombrance she did see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And perill, by this salvage man pretended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst whom she saw no meanes to be defended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By reason that her knight was wounded sore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore her selfe she wholy recommended</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Gods sole grace, whom she did oft implore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To send her succour, being of all hope forlore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But the wyld man, contrarie to her feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came to her creeping like a fawning hound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by rude tokens made to her appeare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His deepe compassion of her dolefull stound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kissing his hands, and crouching to the ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For other language had he none, nor speach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But a soft murmure and confused sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of senselesse words, which nature did him teach</span>
					<br/>
					<span>T'expresse his passions, which his reason did empeach.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, comming likewise to the wounded knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When he beheld the streames of purple blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet flowing fresh, as moved with the sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He made great mone after his salvage mood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, running streight into the thickest wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A certaine herbe from thence unto him brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose vertue he by use well understood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The juyce whereof into his wound he wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stopt the bleeding straight, ere he it staunched thought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then taking up that Recreants shield and speare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which earst he left, he signes unto them made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With him to wend unto his wonning neare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which he easily did them perswade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Farre in the forrest, by a hollow glade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Covered with mossie shrubs, which spredding brode</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did underneath them make a gloomy shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where foot of living creature never trode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne scarse wyld beasts durst come, there was this wights abode.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thether he brought these unacquainted guests,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom faire semblance, as he could, he shewed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By signes, by lookes, and all his other gests;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the bare ground with hoarie mosse bestrewed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Must be their bed; their pillow was unsowed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the frutes of the forrest was their feast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For their bad Stuard neither plough'd nor sowed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne fed on flesh, ne ever of wyld beast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did taste the bloud, obaying natures first beheast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet, howsoever base and meane it were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They tooke it well, and thanked God for all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which had them freed from that deadly feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sav'd from being to that caytive thrall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here they of force (as fortune now did fall)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Compelled were themselves awhile to rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Glad of that easement, though it were but small;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That having there their wounds awhile redrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They mote the abler be to passe unto the rest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>During which time that wyld man did apply</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His best endevour and his daily paine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In seeking all the woods both farre and nye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For herbes to dresse their wounds; still seeming faine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When ought he did, that did their lyking gaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So as ere long he had that knightes wound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Recured well, and made him whole againe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that same Ladies hurt no herbe he found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which could redresse, for it was inwardly unsound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now when as Calepine was woxen strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a day he cast abrode to wend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To take the ayre and heare the thrushes song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unarm'd, as fearing neither foe nor frend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And without sword his person to defend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There him befell, unlocked for before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An hard adventure with unhappie end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A cruell Beare, the which an infant bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Betwixt his bloodie jawes, besprinckled all with gore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The litle babe did loudly scrike and squall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the woods with piteous plaints did fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if his cry did meane for helpe to call</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Calepine, whose eares those shrieches shrill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Percing his hart, with pities point did thrill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That after him he ran with zealous haste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To rescue th' infant, ere he did him kill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom though he saw now somewhat overpast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet by the cry he follow'd, and pursewed fast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Well then him chaunst his heavy armes to want,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose burden mote empeach his needfull speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hinder him from libertie to pant;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For having long time, as his daily weed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them wont to weare, and wend on foot for need,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now wanting them he felt himselfe so light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That like an Hauke, which feeling her selfe freed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From bels and jesses which did let her flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him seem'd his feet did fly and in their speed delight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So well he sped him, that the wearie Beare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere long he overtooke and forst to stay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And without weapon him assayling neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Compeld him soone the spoyle adowne to lay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith the beast enrag'd to loose his pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon him turned, and, with greedie force</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And furie to be crossed in his way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gaping full wyde, did thinke without remorse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be aveng'd on him and to devoure his corse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But the bold knight no whit thereat dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But catching up in hand a ragged stone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which lay thereby (so fortune him did ayde)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon him ran, and thrust it all attone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into his gaping throte, that made him grone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gaspe for breath, that he nigh choked was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being unable to digest that bone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne could it upward come, nor downward passe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne could he brooke the coldnesse of the stony masse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when as he thus combred did behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stryving in vaine that nigh his bowels brast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He with him closd, and, laying mightie hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his throte, did gripe his gorge so fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That wanting breath him downe to ground he cast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, then oppressing him with urgent paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere long enforst to breath his utmost blast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gnashing his cruell teeth at him in vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And threatning his sharpe clawes, now wanting powre to traine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then tooke he up betwixt his armes twaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The litle babe, sweet relickes of his pray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom pitying to heare so sore complaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From his soft eyes the teares he wypt away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from his face the filth that did it ray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every litle limbe he searcht around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every part that under sweath-bands lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least that the beasts sharpe teeth had any wound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made in his tender flesh; but whole them all he found.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So, having all his bands againe uptyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He with him thought backe to returne againe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when he lookt about on every syde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet which way were best to entertaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bring him to the place where he would faine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He could no path nor tract of foot descry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne by inquirie learne, nor ghesse by ayme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For nought but woods and forrests farre and nye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all about did close the compasse of his eye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Much was he then encombred, ne could tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which way to take: now West he went awhile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then North, then neither, but as fortune fell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So up and downe he wandred many a mile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With weary travell and uncertaine toile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet nought the nearer to his journeys end;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evermore his lovely litle spoile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Crying for food did greatly him offend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So all that day in wandring vainely he did spend.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last, about the setting of the Sunne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him selfe out of the forest he did wynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by good fortune the plaine champion wonne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where, looking all about where he mote fynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some place of succour to content his mynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At length he heard under the forrests syde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A voice, that seemed of some woman kynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to her selfe lamenting loudly cryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And oft complayn'd of fate, and fortune oft defyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom approching, when as she perceived</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A stranger wight in place, her plaint she stayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if she doubted to have bene deceived,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or loth to let her sorrowes be bewrayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when as Calepine saw so dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He to her drew, and with faire blandishment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her chearing up, thus gently to her sayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"What be you, wofull Dame, which thus lament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for what cause, declare; so mote ye not repent."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom she thus: "What need me, Sir, to tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That which your selfe have earst ared so right?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A wofull dame ye have me termed well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So much more wofull, as my wofull plight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cannot redressed be by living wight!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Nathlesse," (quoth he) "if need doe not you bynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe it disclose to ease your grieved spright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oftimes it haps that sorrowes of the mynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Find remedie unsought, which seeking cannot fynd."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then thus began the lamentable Dame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Sith then ye needs will know the griefe I hoord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I am th'unfortunate Matilde by name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wife of bold Sir Bruin, who is Lord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all this land, late conquer'd by his sword</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From a great Gyant, called Cormoraunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom he did overthrow by yonder foord;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in three battailes did so deadly daunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he dare not returne for all his daily vaunt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"So is my Lord now seiz'd of all the land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As in his fee, with peaceable estate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And quietly doth hold it in his hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne any dares with him for it debate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to these happie fortunes cruell fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath joyn'd one evill, which doth overthrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All these our joyes, and all our blisse abate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And like in time to further ill to grow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all this land with endlesse losse to overflow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"For th' heavens, envying our prosperitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have not vouchsaft to graunt unto us twaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gladfull blessing of posteritie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which we might see after our selves remaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In th' heritage of our unhappie paine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that for want of heires it to defend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All is in time like to returne againe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To that foule feend, who dayly doth attend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To leape into the same after our lives end.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But most my Lord is grieved herewithall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And makes exceeding mone, when he does thinke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all this land unto his foe shall fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which he long in vaine did sweate and swinke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That now the same he greatly doth forthinke.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was it sayd, there should to him a sonne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be gotten, not begotten; which should drinke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dry up all the water which doth ronne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the next brooke, by whom that feend shold be fordonne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Well hop't he then, when this was propheside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from his sides some noble chyld should rize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which through fame should farre be magnifide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And this proud gyant should with brave emprize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quite overthrow; who now ginnes to despize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The good Sir Bruin growing farre in yeares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who thinkes from me his sorrow all doth rize.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lo! this my cause of griefe to you appeares;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which I thus doe mourne, and poure forth ceaselesse teares."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when he heard, he inly touched was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With tender ruth for her unworthy griefe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, when he had devized of her case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan in mind conceive a fit reliefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all her paine, if please her make the priefe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, having cheared her, thus said: "Faire Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In evils counsell is the comfort chiefe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which though I be not wise enough to frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, as I well it meane, vouchsafe it without blame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"If that the cause of this your languishment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be lacke of children to supply your place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lo! how good fortune doth to you present</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This litle babe, of sweete and lovely face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And spotlesse spirit in which ye may enchace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whatever formes ye list thereto apply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being now soft and fit them to embrace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether ye list him traine in chevalry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or noursle up in lore of learn'd Philosophy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And, certes, it hath oftentimes bene scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of the like, whose linage was unknowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More brave and noble knights have raysed beene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(As their victorious deedes have often showen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being with fame through many Nations blowen,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then those which have bene dandled in the lap:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore some thought that those brave imps were sowen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here by the Gods, and fed with heavenly sap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That made them grow so high t' all honorable hap."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Ladie, hearkning to his sensefull speach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Found nothing that he said unmeet nor geason,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having oft scene it tryde as he did teach:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore inclyning to his goodly reason,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Agreeing well both with the place and season,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She gladly did of that same babe accept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As of her owne by liverey and seisin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, having over it a litle wept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She bore it thence, and ever as her owne it kept.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Right glad was Calepine to be so rid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his young charge whereof he skilled nought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne she lesse glad; for she so wisely did,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with her husband under hand so wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, when that infant unto him she brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She made him think it surely was his owne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And it in goodly thewes so well upbrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it became a famous knight well knowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And did right noble deedes; the which elswhere are showne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Calepine, now being left alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under the greenewoods side in sorie plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withouten armes or steede to ride upon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or house to hide his head from heavens spight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Albe that Dame, by all the meanes she might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him oft desired home with her to wend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And offred him, his courtesie to requite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both horse and armes and what so else to lend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet he them all refusd, though thankt her as a frend;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, for exceeding griefe which inly grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he his love so lucklesse now had lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On the cold ground maugre himselfe he threw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For fell despight to be so sorely crost;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there all night himselfe in anguish tost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vowing that never he in bed againe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His limbes would rest, ne lig in ease embost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that his Ladies sight he mote attaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or understand that she in safetie did remaine.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-5" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The Salvage serves Serena well,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Till she Prince Arthure fynd;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who her together with his Squyre,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With th'Hermit leaves behynd.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>O what an easie thing is to descry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gentle bloud, how ever it be wrapt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In sad misfortunes foule deformity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wretched sorrowes, which have often hapt!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For howsoever it may grow mis-shapt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like this wyld man being undisciplynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to all vertue it may seeme unapt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet will it shew some sparkes of gentle mynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at the last breake forth in his owne proper kynd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That plainely may in this wyld man be red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, though he were still in this desert wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst salvage beasts both rudely borne and bred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever saw faire guize, ne learned good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet shewd some token of his gentle blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By gentle usage of that wretched Dame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For certes he was borne of noble blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How ever by hard hap he h ether came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As ye may know when time shall be to tell the same.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who, when as now long time he lacked had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The good Sir Calepine, that farre was strayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did wexe exceeding sorrowfull and sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he of some misfortune were afrayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, leaving there this Ladie all dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Went forth streightway into the forrest wyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke if he perchance asleep were layd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or what so else were unto him betyde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sought him farre and neare, yet him no where he spyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho, backe returning to that sorie Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He shewed semblant of exceeding mone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By speaking signes, as he them best could frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now wringing both his wretched hands in one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now beating his hard head upon a stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ruth it was to see him so lament:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which she well perceiving what was done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan teare her hayre, and all her garments rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And beat her breast, and piteously her selfe torment.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Upon the ground her selfe she fiercely threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Regardlesse of her wounds yet bleeding rife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with their bloud did all the flore imbrew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if her breast, new launcht with murdrous knife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would streight dislodge the wretched wearie life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There she long groveling and deepe groning lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if her vitall powers were at strife</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With stronger death, and feared their decay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such were this Ladies pangs and dolorous assay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when the Salvage saw so sore distrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He reared her up from the bloudie ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sought by all the meanes that he could best</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her to recure out of that stony swound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And staunch the bleeding of her dreary wound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet nould she be recomforted for nought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor cease her sorrow and impatient stound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But day and night did vexe her carefull thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ever more and more her owne affliction wrought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At length, when as no hope of his retourne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She saw now left, she cast to leave the place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wend abrode, though feeble and forlorne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke some comfort in that sorie case.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His steede, now strong through rest so long a space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well as she could she got, and did bedight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And being thereon mounted forth did pace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withouten guide her to condudt aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or gard her to defend from bold oppressors might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when her Host saw readie to depart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He would not suffer her alone to fare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But gan himselfe addresse to take her part.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those warlike armes which Calepine whyleare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had left behind he gan eftsoones prepare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And put them all about himselfe unfit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His shield, his helmet, and his curats bare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But without sword upon his thigh to sit:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sir Calepine himselfe away had hidden it.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So forth they traveld, an uneven payre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That mote to all men seeme an uncouth sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A salvage man matcht with a Ladie fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That rather seem'd the conquest of his might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gotten by spoyle then purchaced aright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he did her attend most carefully,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And faithfully did serve both day and night</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withouten thought of shame or villeny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne ever shewed signe of foule disloyalty.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Upon a day, as on their way they went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It chaunst some furniture about her steed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be disordred by some accident,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to redresse she did th'assistance need</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of this her groome; which he by signes did reede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And streight his combrous armes aside did lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the ground withouten doubt or dreed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his homely wize began to assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>T'amend what was amisse, and put in right aray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Bout which whilest he was busied thus hard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lo! where a knight, together with his squire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All arm'd to point came ryding thetherward;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which seemed, by their portance and attire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be two errant knights, that did inquire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After adventures, where they mote them get.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those were to weet (if that ye it require)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Prince Arthur and young Timias, which met</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By straunge occasion that here needs forth be set.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>After that Timias had againe recured</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The favour of Belphebe (as ye heard)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of her grace did stand againe assured,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To happie blisse he was full high uprear'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nether of envy nor of chaunge afeard:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though many foes did him maligne therefore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with unjust detraction him did beard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet he himselfe so well and wisely bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in her soveraine lyking he dwelt evermore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But of them all which did his ruine seeke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Three mightie enemies did him most despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Three mightie ones, and cruell minded eeke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That him not onely sought by open might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To overthrow, but to supplant by slight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The first of them by name was cald Despetto,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Exceeding all the rest in powre and hight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The second, not so strong but wise, Decetto;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The third, nor strong nor wise, but spightfullest, Defetto.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Oftimes their sundry powres they did employ,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And several deceipts, but all in vaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For neither they by force could him destroy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne yet entrap in treasons subtill traine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore, conspiring all together plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They did their counsels now in one compound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where singled forces faile, conjoynd may gaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Blatant Beast the fittest meanes they found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To worke his utter shame, and throughly him confound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Upon a day, as they the time did waite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When he did raunge the wood for salvage game,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They sent that Blatant Beast to be a baite</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To draw him from his deare beloved dame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unwares into the daunger of defame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For well they wist that Squire to be so bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That no one beast in forrest, wylde or tame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Met him in chase but he it challenge would,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And plucke the pray oftimes out of their greedy hould.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The hardy boy, as they devised had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeing the ugly Monster passing by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon him set, of perill nought adrad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne skilfull of the uncouth jeopardy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And charged him so fierce and furiously,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That his great force unable to endure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He forced was to turne from him and fly:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet ere he fled he with his tooth impure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him heedlesse bit, the whiles he was thereof secure.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Securely he did after him pursew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thinking by speed to overtake his flight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who through thicke woods and brakes and briers him drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weary him the more and waste his spight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that he now has almost spent his spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that at length unto a woody glade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He came, whose covert stopt his further sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There his three foes shrowded in guilefull shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of their ambush broke, and gan him to invade.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sharpely they all attonce did him assaile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Burning with inward rancour and despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heaped strokes did round about him haile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With so huge force, that seemed nothing might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beare off their blowes from percing thorough quite:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet he them all so warily did ward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none of them in his soft flesh did bite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the while his backe for best safegard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He lent against a tree, that backeward onset bard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like a wylde Bull, that, being at a bay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is bayted of a mastiffe and a hound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And a curre-dog, that doe him sharpe assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On every side, and beat about him round;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But most that curre, barking with bitter sownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And creeping still behinde, doth him incomber,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in his chauffe he digs the trampled ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And threats his horns, and bellowes like the thonder</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So did that Squire his foes disperse and drive asonder.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Him well behoved so; for his three foes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sought to encompasse him on every side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dangerously did round about enclose:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But most of all Defetto him annoyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Creeping behinde him still to have destroyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So did Decetto eke him circumvent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But stout Despetto in his greater pryde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did front him, face to face against him bent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet he them all withstood, and often made relent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Till that at length, nigh tyrd with former chace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And weary now with carefull keeping ward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan to shrinke and somewhat to give place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full like ere long to have escaped hard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When as unwares he in the forrest heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A trampling steede, that with his neighing fast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did warne his rider be uppon his gard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With noise whereof the Squire, now nigh aghast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Revived was, and sad dispaire away did cast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones he spide a Knight approching nye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, seeing one in so great daunger set</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst many foes, him selfe did faster hye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To reskue him, and his weake part abet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For pitty so to see him overset:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom soone as his three enemies did vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They fled, and fast into the wood did get.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him booted not to thinke them to pursew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The covert was so thicke that did no passage shew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then turning to that swaine him well he knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be his Timias, his owne true Squire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof exceeding glad he to him drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, him embracing twixt his armes entire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him thus bespake: "My liefe, my lifes desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why have ye me alone thus long yleft?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tell me what worlds despight, or heavens yre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath you thus long away from me bereft?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where have ye all this while bin wandring, where bene weft?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that he sighed deepe for inward tyne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom the Squire nought aunswered againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, shedding few soft teares from tender eyne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His dear affect with silence did restraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shut up all his plaint in privy paine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There they awhile some gracious speaches spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As to them seemed fit time to entertaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After all which up to their steedes they went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And forth together rode, a comely couplement.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So now they be arrived both in sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of this wyld man, whom they full busie found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About the sad Serena things to dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With those brave armours lying on the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seem'd the spoile of some right well renownd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when that Squire beheld, he to them stept</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thinking to take them from that hylding hound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he it seeing lightly to him lept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sternely with strong hand it from his handling kept.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Gnashing his grinded teeth with griesly looke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sparkling fire out of his furious eyne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him with his fist unwares on th' head he strooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That made him downe unto the earth encline;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence soone upstarting much he gan repine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And laying hand upon his wrathfull blade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thought therewithall forthwith him to have slaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who it perceiving hand upon him layd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And greedily him griping his avengement stayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that aloude the faire Serena cryde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the Knight, them to dispart in twaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who to them stepping did them soone divide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did from further violence restraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Albe the wyld-man hardly would refraine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan the Prince of her for to demand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What and from whence she was, and by what traine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She fell into that salvage villaines hand?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And whether free with him she now were, or in band?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom she thus: "I am, as now ye see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wretchedst Dame that lives this day on ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who both in minde, the which most grieveth me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And body have receiv'd a mortall wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hath me driven to this drery stound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I was erewhile the love of Calepine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who whether he alive be to be found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or by some deadly chaunce be done to pine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since I him lately lost, uneath is to define.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"In salvage forrest I him lost of late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where I had surely long ere this bene dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or else remained in most wretched state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had not this wylde man in that wofull stead</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kept and delivered me from deadly dread.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In such a salvage wight, of brutish kynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst wilde beastes in desert forrests bred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It is most straunge and wonderfull to fynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So milde humanity and perfect gentle mynd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Let me therefore this favour for him finde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ye will not your wrath upon him wreake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith he cannot expresse his simple mmde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne yours conceive, ne but by tokens speake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Small praise to prove your powre on wight so weake."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With such faire words she did their heat asswage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the strong course of their displeasure breake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they to pitty turnd their former rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And each sought to supply the office of her page.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So having all things well about her dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She on her way cast forward to proceede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And they her forth conducted, where they might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Finde harbour fit to comfort her great neede;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For now her wounds corruption gan to breed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke this Squire, who likewise wounded was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that same Monster late, for lacke of heed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now gan to faint, and further could not pas</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through feeblenesse, which all his limbes oppressed has.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So forth they rode together all in troupe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke some place the which mote yeeld some ease</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To these sicke twaine, that now began to droupe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the way the Prince sought to appease</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bitter anguish of their sharpe disease</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By all the courteous meanes he could invent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Somewhile with merry purpose, fit to please,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And otherwhile with good encouragement</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make them to endure the pains did them torment.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Mongst which Serena did to him relate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The foule discourt'sies and unknightly parts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Turpine had unto her shewed late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without compassion of her cruell smarts:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Although Blandina did with all her arts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him otherwise perswade all that she might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet he of malice, without her desarts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not onely her excluded late at night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But also trayterously did wound her weary Knight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Wherewith the Prince sore moved there avoud</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That soone as he returned backe againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He would avenge th'abuses of that proud</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shamefull Knight of whom she did complaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This wize did they each other entertaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To passe the tedious travell of the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till towards night they came unto a plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which a little Hermitage there lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far from all neighbourhood the which annoy itonay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And nigh thereto a little Chappell stoode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which being all with Yvy overspred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deckt all the roofe, and, shadowing the roode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seem'd like a grove faire braunched over-hed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therein the Hermite, which his life here led</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In streight observaunce of religious vow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was wont his howres and holy things to bed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therein he likewise was praying now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whenas these Knights arriv'd, they wist not where nor how.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They stayd not there, but streightway in did pas:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when the Hermite present saw in place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From his devotion streight he troubled was;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which breaking off he toward them did pace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With stayed steps and grave beseeming grace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For well it seem'd that whilome he had beene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some goodly person, and of gentle race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That could his good to all; and well did weene</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How each to entertaine with curt'sie well beseene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And soothly it was sayd by common fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So long as age enabled him thereto,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he had bene a man of mickle name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Renowmed much in armes and derring doe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But being aged now, and weary to</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of warres delight and worlds contentious toyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The name of knighthood he did disavow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, hanging up his armes and warlike spoyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From all this worlds incombraunce did himselfe assoyle.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He thence them led into his Hermitage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Letting their steedes to graze upon the greene.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Small was his house, and like a little cage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For his owne turne, yet inly neate and clene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deckt with greene boughes and flowers gay beseene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therein he them full faire did entertaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not with such forged showes, as fitter beene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For courting fooles that curtesies would faine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But with entire affection and appearaunce plaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet was their fare but homely, such as hee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did use his feeble body to sustaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which full gladly they did take in gree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as it was, ne did of want complaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But being well suffiz'd them rested faine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But fair Serene all night could take no rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne yet that gentle Squire, for grievous paine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of their late woundes, the which the Blatant Beast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had given them, whose griefe through suffraunce sore increast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So all that night they past in great disease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that the morning, bringing earely light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To guide mens labours, brought them also ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And some asswagement of their painefull plight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then up they rose, and gan them selves to dight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto their journey; but that Squire and Dame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So faint and feeble were, that they ne might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Endure to travell, nor one foote to frame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their hearts were sicke; their sides were sore; their feete were lame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therefore the Prince, whom great affaires in mynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would not permit to make there lenger stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was forced there to leave them both behynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In that good Hermits charge; whom he did pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tend them well. So forth he went his way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with him eke the salvage, (that whyleare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeing his royall usage and array</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was greatly growne in love of that brave pere,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would rteedes depart; as shall declared be elsewhere.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-6" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The Hermit heales both Squire and Dame</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of their sore maladies:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He Turpine doth defeate and shame</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">For his late villenies.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>No wound, which warlike hand of enemy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Inflicts with dint of sword, so sore doth light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As doth the poysnous sting, which infamy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Infixeth in the name of noble wight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For by no art, nor any leaches might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It ever can recured be againe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">skill, which that immortall spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Podalyrius did in it retaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can remedy such hurts: such hurts are hellish paine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such were the wounds the which that Blatant Beast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made in the bodies of that Squire and Dame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, being such, were now much more increast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For want of taking heede unto the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That now corrupt and curelesse they became:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Howbe that carefull Hermite did his best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With many kindes of medicines meete, to tame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The poysnous humour which did most infest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their ranckling wounds, and every day them duely drest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For he right well in Leaches craft was scene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through the long experience of his dayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which had in many fortunes tossed beene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And past through many perillous assayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He knew the diverse went of mortall wayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the mindes of men had great insight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with sage counsell, when they went astray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He could enforme, and them reduce aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the passions heale which wound the weaker spright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For whylome he had bene a doughty Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As any one that lived in his daies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And proved oft in many perillous fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which he grace and glory wonne alwaies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in all battels bore away the baies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But being now attacht with timely age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And weary of this worlds unquiet waies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He tooke him selfe unto this Hermitage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which he liv'd alone, like carelesse bird in cage.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One day, as he was searching of their wounds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He found that they had festred privily;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ranckling inward with unruly stounds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The inner parts now gan to putrify,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That quite they seem'd past helpe of surgery;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rather needed to be disciplinde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With holesome reede of sad sobriety,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To rule the stubborne rage of passion blinde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give salves to every sore, but counsell to the minde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So, taking them apart into his cell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He to that point fit speaches gan to frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he the art of words knew wondrous well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke could doe as well as say the same;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thus he to them sayd: "Faire daughter Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And you, faire Sonne, which here thus long now lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In piteous languor since ye hither came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In vaine of me ye hope for remedie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I likewise in vaine doe salves to you applie:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"For in your selfe your onely helpe doth lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To heale your selves, and must proceed alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From your owne will to cure your maladie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who can him cure that will be cur'd of none?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If therefore health ye seeke, observe this one:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First learne your outward senses to refraine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From things that stirre up fraile affection;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your eies, your eares, your tongue, your talk restraine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From that they most affect, and in due termes containe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"For from those outward sences, ill affected,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The seede of all this evill first doth spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which at the first, before it had infected,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mote easie be supprest with little thing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But being growen strong it forth doth bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sorrow, and anguish, and impatient paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In th'inner parts; and lastly, scattering</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Contagious poyson close through every vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It never rests till it have wrought his finall bane.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"For that beastes teeth, which wounded you tofore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are so exceeding venemous and keene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made all of rusty yron ranckling sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That where they bite it booteth not to weene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With salve, or antidote, or other mene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It ever to amend: ne marvaile ought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that same beast was bred of hellish strene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And long in darksome Stygian den upbrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Begot of foule Echidna, as in bookes is taught.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Echidna is a Monster direfull dred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom Gods doe hate, and heavens abhor to see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So hideous is her shape, so huge her hed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That even the hellish fiends affrighted bee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At sight thereof, and from her presence flee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet did her face and former parts professe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A faire young Mayden, full of comely glee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all her hinder parts did plaine expresse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A monstrous Dragon, full of fearefull uglinesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"To her the Gods, for her so dreadfull face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In fearefull darkenesse, furthest from the skie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from the earth, appointed have her place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst rocks and caves, where she enrold doth lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hideous horrour and obscurity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wasting the strength of her immortall age:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There did Typhaon with her company;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cruell Typhaon, whose tempestuous rage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Makes th' heavens tremble oft, and him with vowes asswage.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Of that commixtion they did then beget</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This hellish Dog, that hight the Blatant Beast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A wicked Monster, that his tongue doth whet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst all, both good and bad, both most and least,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pours his poysnous gall forth to infest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The noblest wights with notable defame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever Knight that bore so lofty creast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever Lady of so honest name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he them spotted with reproch, or secrete shame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"In vaine therefore it were with medicine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To goe about to salve such kynd of sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That rather needes wise read and discipline,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then outward salves that may augment it more."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Aye me!" (sayd then Serena, sighing sore)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"What hope of helpe doth then for us remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If that no salves may us to health restore?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"But sith we need good counsell," (sayd the swaine)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Aread, good Sire, some counsell that may us sustaine."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"The best" (sayd he) "that I can you advize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is to avoide the occasion of the ill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For when the cause, whence evill doth arize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Removed is, th'effecl surceaseth still.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abstaine from pleasure, and restraine your will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Subdue desire, and bridle loose delight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Use scanted diet, and forbeare your fill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shun secresie, and talke in open sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So shall you soone repaire your present evill plight."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus having sayd, his sickely patients</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did gladly hearken to his grave beheast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And kept so well his wise commaundements,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in short space their malady was ceast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the biting of that harmefull Beast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was throughly heal'd. Tho when they did perceave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their wounds recur'd, and forces reincreast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that good Hermite both they tooke their leave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And went both on their way, ne ech would other leave:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But each the other vow'd t'accompany:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Lady, for that she was much in dred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now left alone in great extremity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Squire, for that he courteous was indeed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would not her leave alone in her great need.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So both together traveld, till they met</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a faire Mayden clad in mourning weed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a mangy jade unmeetely set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a lewd foole her leading thorough dry and wet.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But by what meanes that shame to her befell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And how thereof her selfe she did acquite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I must awhile forbeare to you to tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that, as comes by course, I doe recite</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What fortune to the Briton Prince did lite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pursuing that proud Knight, the which whileare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wrought to Sir Calepine so foule despight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke his Lady, though she sickely were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So lewdly had abusde, as ye did lately heare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Prince, according to the former token</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which faire Serene to him delivered had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pursu'd him streight; in mynd to bene ywroken</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the vile demeane and usage bad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which he had those two so ill bestad:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne wight with him on that adventure went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that wylde man; whom though he oft forbad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet for no bidding, nor for being shent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would he restrayned be from his attendement.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Arriving there, as did by chaunce befall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He found the gate wydc ope, and in he rode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne stayd, till that he came into \he hall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where soft dismounting, like a weary lode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the ground with feeble feete he trode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he unable were for very neede</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To move one foote, but there must make abode:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles the salvage man did take his steede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in some stable neare did set him up to feede.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ere long to him a homely groome there came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in rude wise him asked, what he was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That durst so boldly, without let or shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into his Lords forbidden hall to passe?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom the Prince, him fayning to embase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mylde answer made, he was an errant Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which was fall'n into this feeble case</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through many wounds, which lately he in fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Received had, and prayd to pitty his ill plight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But he, the more outrageous and bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sternely did bid him quickely thence avaunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or deare aby; for-why his Lord of old</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did hate all errant Knights which there did haunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne lodging would to any of them graunt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therefore lightly bad him packe away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not sparing him with bitter words to taunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therewithall rude hand on him did lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thrust him out of dore doing his worst assay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when the Salvage, comming now in place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beheld, eftsoones he all enraged grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, running streight upon that villaine base,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like a fell Lion at him fiercely flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his teeth and nailes, in present vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him rudely rent and all to peeces tore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So miserably him all helpelesse slew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with the noise, whilest he did loudly rore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The people of the house rose forth in great uprore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who when on ground they saw their fellow slaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that same Knight and Salvage standing by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon them two they fell with might and maine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on them layd so huge and horribly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if they would have slaine them presently:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the bold Prince defended him so well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And their assault withstood so mightily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, maugre all their might, he did repell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And beat them back, whilest many underneath him fell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet he them still so sharpely did pursew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That few of them he left alive, which fled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those evill tidings to their Lord to shew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, hearing how his people badly sped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came forth in hast; where, when as with the dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He saw the ground all strow'd, and that same Knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And salvage with their bloud fresh steeming red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He woxe nigh mad with wrath and fell despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with reprochfull words him thus bespake on hight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Art thou he, traytor, that with treason vile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hast slaine my men in this unmanly maner,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now triumphest in the piteous spoile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of these poore folk, whose soules with black dishonor</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And foule defame doe decke thy bloudy baner?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The meede whereof shall shortly be thy shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wretched end which still attendeth on her."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that him selfe to battell he did frame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So did his forty yeomen, which there with him came.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With dreadfull force they all did him assaile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And round about with boystrous strokes oppresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That on his shield did rattle like to haile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In a great tempest; that in such distresse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He wist not to which side him to addresse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evermore that craven cowherd Knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was at his backe with heartlesse heedinesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wayting if he un wares him murther might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For cowardize doth still in villany delight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whereof whenas the Prince was well aware,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He to him turnd with furious intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him against his powre gan to prepare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like a fierce Bull, that being busie bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To fight with many foes about him ment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Feeling some curre behinde his heeles to bite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turnes him about with fell avengement:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So likewise turnde the Prince upon the Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And layd at him amaine with all his will and might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who, when he once his dreadfull strokes had tasted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Durst not the furie of his force abyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But turn'd abacke, and to retyre him hasted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through the thick prease, there thinking him to hyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when the Prince had once him plainely eyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He foot by foot him followed alway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne would him suffer once to shrinke asyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But joyning close huge lode at him did lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who flying still did ward, and warding fly away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, when his foe he still so eager saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto his heeles himselfe he did betake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hoping unto some refuge to withdraw:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne would the Prince him ever foot forsake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where so he went, but after him did make.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He fled from roome to roome, from place to place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whylest every joynt for dread of death did quake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still looking after him that did him chace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That made him evermore increase his speedie pace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last he up into the chamber came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereas his love was sitting all alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wayting what tydings of her folke became.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There did the Prince him overtake anone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Crying in vaine to her him to bemone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his sword him on the head did smyte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to the ground he fell in senselesse swone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, whether thwart or flatly it did lyte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tempred steele did not into his braynepan byte.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when the Ladie saw, with great affright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She starting up began to shrieke aloud;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with her garment covering him from sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seem'd under her protection him to shroud;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And falling lowly at his feet her bowd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon her knee, intreating him for grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And often him besought, and prayd, and vowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with the ruth of her so wretched case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He stayd his second strooke, and did his hand abase.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her weed she then withdrawing did him discover;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who now come to himselfe yet would not rize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But still did lie as dead, and quake, and quiver,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That even the Prince his basenesse did despize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke his Dame, him seeing in such guize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan him recomfort and from ground to reare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who rising up at last in ghastly wize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like troubled ghost, did dreadfully appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As one that had no life him left through former feare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when the Prince so deadly saw dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He for such basenesse shamefully him shent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with sharpe words did bitterly upbrayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Vile cowheard dogge! now doe I much repent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ever I this life unto thee lent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof thou, caytive, so unworthie art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That both thy love, for lacke of hardiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke thy selfe, for want of manly hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke all knights hast shamed with this knightlesse part.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Yet further hast thou heaped shame to shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And crime to crime, by this thy cowheard feare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For first, it was to thee reprochfull blame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To erect this wicked custome, which I heare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst errant Knights and Ladies thou dost reare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when thou mayst thou dost of arms despoile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or of their upper garment which they weare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet doest thou not with manhood, but with guile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Maintaine this evil use, thy foes thereby to foile.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And lastly, in approvance of thy wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To shew such faintnesse and foule cowardize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is greatest shame; for oft it falles, that strong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And valiant Knights doe rashly enterprize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Either for fame, or else for exercize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A wrongfull quarrell to maintaine by fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet have through prowesse and their brave emprize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gotten great worship in this worldes sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For greater force there needs to maintaine wrong then right.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Yet, since thy life unto this Ladie fayre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I given have, live in reproch and scorne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever armes ne ever knighthood dare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hence to professe; for shame is to adorne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With so brave badges one so basely borne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But onely breath, sith that I did forgive."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So having from his craven bodie torne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those goodly armes, he them away did give,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And onely suffred him this wretched life to live.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There whilest he thus was setling things above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Atwene that Ladie myld and recreant knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom his life he graunted for her love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan bethinke him in what perilous plight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He had behynd him left that salvage wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst so many foes, whom sure he thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By this quite slaine in so unequall fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore descending backe in haste he sought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If yet he were alive, or to destruction brought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There he him found environed about</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With slaughtred bodies which his hand had slaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And laying yet afresh, with courage stout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the rest that did alive remaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom he likewise right sorely did constraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like scattred sheepe, to seeke for safetie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After he gotten had with busie paine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some of their weapons which thereby did lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With which he layd about, and made them fast to flie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when the Prince so felly saw to rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Approching to him neare, his hand he stayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sought by making signes him to asswage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who them perceiving streight to him obayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As to his Lord, and downe his weapons layd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if he long had to his heasts bene trayned.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence he him brought away, and up convayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the chamber, where that Dame remayned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With her unworthy knight, who ill him entertayned.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when the Salvage saw from daunger free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sitting beside his Ladie there at ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He well remembred that the same was hee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which lately sought his Lord for to displease:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho all in rage he on him streight did seaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if he would in peeces him have rent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, were not that the Prince did him appeaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He had not left one limbe of him unrent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But streight he held his hand at his commaundement.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus having all things well in peace ordayned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Prince himselfe there all that night did rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where him Blandina fayrely entertayned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all the courteous glee and goodly feast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which for him she could imagine best:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For well she knew the wayes to win good will</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of every wight, that were not too infest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And how to please the minds of good and ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through tempering of her words and lookes by wondrous skill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet were her words and lookes but false and fayned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To some hid end to make more easie way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or to allure such fondlings whom she trayned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into her trap unto their owne decay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereto, when needed, she could weepe and pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when her listed she could fawne and flatter;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now smyling smoothly, like to sommers day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now glooming sadly, so to cloke her matter;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet were her words but wynd, and all her teares but water.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whether such grace were given her by kynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As women wont their guilefull wits to guyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or learn'd the art to please, I doe not fynd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This well I wote, that she so well applyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her pleasing tongue, that soone she pacifyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wrathfull Prince, and wrought her husbands peace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who nathelesse, not therewith satisfyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His rancorous despight did not releasse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne secretly from thought of fell revenge surceasse:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For all that night, the whyles the Prince did rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In carelesse couch, not weeting what was ment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He watcht in close awayt with weapons prest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Willing to worke his villenous intent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On him that had so shamefully him shent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet durst he not for very cowardize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Effect the same, whylest all the night was spent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The morrow next the Prince did early rize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And passed forth to follow his first enterprize.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-7" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Turpine is baffuld: his two Knights</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Doe gain their treasons meed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fayre Mirabellaes punishment</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">For Loves disdaine decreed.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Like as the gentle hart it selfe bewrayes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In doing gentle deedes with franke delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even so the baser mind it selfe displayes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In cancred malice and revengefull spight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For to maligne, t'envie, t'use shifting slight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be arguments of a vile donghill mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, what it dare not doe by open might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To worke by wicked treason wayes doth find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By such discourteous deeds discovering his base kind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That well appears in this discourteous knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The coward Turpine, whereof now I treat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who notwithstanding that in former' fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He of the Prince his life received late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet in his mind, malitious and ingrate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan devize to be aveng'd anew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all that shame, which kindled inward hate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore, so soone as he was out of vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Himselfe in hast he arm'd, and did him fast pursew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Well did he tracl his steps as he did ryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet would not neare approch in daungers eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But kept aloofe for dread to be descry de,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill fit time and place he mote espy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where he mote worke him scath and villeny.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last he met two knights to him unknowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which were armed both agreeably,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both combynd, whatever chaunce were blowne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Betwixt them to divide, and each to make his owne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom false Turpine comming courteously,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To cloke the mischiefe which he inly ment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan to complaine of great discourtesie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which a straunge knight, that neare afore him went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had doen to him, and his deare Ladie shent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which if they would afford him ayde at need</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For to avenge in time convenient,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They should accomplish both a knightly deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for their paines obtaine of him a goodly meed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The knights beleev'd that all he sayd was trew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And being fresh and full of youthly spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were glad to heare of that adventure new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which they mote make triall of their might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which never yet they had approved in fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke desirous of the offred meed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said then the one of them; "Where is that wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which hath doen to thee this wrongfull deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That we may it avenge, and punish him with speed?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"He rides" (said Turpine) "there not farre afore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a wyld man soft footing by his syde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, if ye list to haste a litle more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye may him overtake in timely tyde."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones they pricked forth with forward pryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, ere that litle while they ridden had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gentle Prince not farre away they spyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ryding a softly pace with portance sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Devizing of his love more then of daunger drad.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then one of them aloud unto him cryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bidding him turne againe, false traytour knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Foule woman-wronger, for he him defyde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that they both at once with equall spight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did bend their speares, and both with equall might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against him ran; but th'one did misse his marke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And being carried with his force forthright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Glaunst swiftly by; like to that heavenly sparke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which glyding through the ayre lights all the heavens darke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But th'other, ayming better, did him smite</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full in the shield with so impetuous powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all his launce in peeces shivered quite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And scattered all about fell on the flowre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the stout Prince, with much more steddy stowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full on his bever did him strike so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the cold steele, through piercing, did devowre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His vitall breath, and to the ground him bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where still he bathed lay in his owne bloody gore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when a cast of Faulcons make their flight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At an Herneshaw, that lyes aloft on wing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whyles they strike at him with heedlesse might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wane foule his bill doth backward wring;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which the first, whose force her first doth bring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her selfe quite through the bodie doth engore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And falleth downe to ground like senselesse thing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But th'other, not so swift as she before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fayles of her souse, and passing by doth hurt no more.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By this the other, which was passed by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himselfe recovering was return'd to fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where when he saw his fellow lifelesse ly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He much was daunted with so dismall sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, nought abating of his former spight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let drive at him with so malitious mynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if he would have passed through him quight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the steele-head no stedfast hold could fynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But glauncing by deceiv'd him of that he desynd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Not so the Prince; for his well-learned speare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tooke surer hould, and from his horses backe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above a launces length him forth did beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gainst the cold hard earth so sore him strake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all his bones in peeces nigh he brake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where seeing him so lie, he left his steed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to him leaping vengeance thought to take</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of him for all his former follies meed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With flaming sword in hand his terror more to breed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The fearfull swayne beholding: death so nie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cryde out aloud for mercie, him to save;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In lieu whereof he would to him descrie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great treason to him meant, his life to reave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Prince soone hearkned, and his life forgave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then thus said he: "There is a straunger knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which, for promise of great meed, us drave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To this attempt to wreake his hid despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that himselfe thereto did want sufficient might."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Prince much mused at such villenie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sayd: "Now sure ye well have earn'd your meed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For th'one is dead, and th'other soone shall die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unlesse to me thou hether bring with speed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wretch that hyr'd you to this wicked deed."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He glad of life, and willing eke to wreake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The guilt on him which did this mischiefe breed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Swore by his sword, that neither day nor weeke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would surceasse, but him where so he were would seeke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So up he rose, and forth streightway he went</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Backe to the place where Turpine late he lore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There he him found in great astonishment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see him so bedight with bloodie gore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And griesly wounds that him appalled sore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet thus at length he said: "How now, Sir knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What meaneth this which here I see before?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How fortuneth this foule uncomely plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So different from that which earst ye seem'd in sight?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Perdie," (said he) "in evill hourc it fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ever I for meed did undertake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So hard a taske as life for hyre to sell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which I earst adventur'd for your sake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Witnesse the wounds, and this wyde bloudie lake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which ye may see yet all about me steeme.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore now yeeld, as ye did promise make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My due reward, the which right well I deeme</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I yearned have, that life so dearely did redeeme."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But where then is" (quoth he halfe wrothfully)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Where is the bootie, which therefore I bought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That cursed caytive, my strong enemy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That recreant knight, whose hated life I sought?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And where is eke your friend which halfe it ought?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"He lyes" (said he) "upon the cold bare ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Slayne of that errant knight with whom he fought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom afterwards my selfe with many a wound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did slay againe, as ye may see there in the stound."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereof false Turpin was full glad and faine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And needs with him streight to the place would ryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where he himselfe might see his foeman slaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For else his feare could not be satisfyde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So as they rode he saw the way all dyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With streames of bloud; which tracking by the traile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere long they came, whereas in evill tyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That other swayne, like ashes deadly pale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lay in the lap of death, rewing his wretched bale.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Much did the Craven seeme to mone his case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That for his sake his deare life had forgone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, him bewayling with affection base,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did counterfeit kind pittie where was none:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For wheres no courage, theres no ruth nor mone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence passing forth, not farre away he found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereas the Prince himselfe lay all alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Loosely displayd upon the grassie ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Possessed of sweete sleepe that luld him soft in swound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Wearie of travell in his former fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He there in shade himselfe had layd to rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having his armes and warlike things undight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fearelesse of foes that mote his peace molest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whyles his salvage page, that wont be prest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was wandred in the wood another way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To doe some thing that seemed to him best;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whyles his Lord in silver slomber lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like to the Evening starre adorn'd with deawy ray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when as Turpin saw so loosely layd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He weened well that he in deed was dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as that other knight to him had sayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when he nigh approcht, he mote aread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Plaine signes in him of life and livelihead:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat, much griev'd against that straunger knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That him too light of credence did mislead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He would have backe retyred from that sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That was to him on earth the deadliest despight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But that same knight would not once let him start,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But plainely gan to him declare the case</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all his mischiefe and late lucklesse smart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How both he and his fellow there in place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were vanquished, and put to foule disgrace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And how that he, in lieu of life him lent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had vow'd unto the victor him to trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And follow through the world where so he went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till that he him delivered to his punishment.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He, therewith much abashed and affrayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began to tremble every limbe and vaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, softly whispering him, entyrely prayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T'advize him better then by such a traine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him to betray unto a straunger swaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet rather counseld him contrarywize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith he likewise did wrong by him sustaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To joyne with him and vengeance to devize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whylest time did offer meanes him sleeping to surprize.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nathelesse, for all his speach the gentle knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would not be tempted to such villenie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Regarding more his faith which he did plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All were it to his mortall enemie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then to entrap him by false treacherie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great shame in lieges blood to be embrew'd!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus whylest they were debating diverslie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Salvage forth out of the wood issew'd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Backe to the place, whereas his Lord he sleeping vew'd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There when he saw those two so neare him stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He doubted much what mote their meaning bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And throwing downe his load out of his hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(To weet, great store of forrest frute which hee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had for his food late gathered from the tree,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himselfe unto his weapon he betooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was an oaken plant, which lately hee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rent by the root; which he so sternely shooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That like an hazell wand it quivered and quooke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whereat the Prince awaking, when he spyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The traytour Turpin with that other knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He started up; and snatching neare his syde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His trustie sword, the servant of his might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like a fell Lyon leaped to him light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his left hand upon his collar layd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith the cowheard, deaded with affright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fell flat to ground, ne word unto him sayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, holding up his hands, with silence mercie prayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But he so full of indignation was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to his prayer nought he would incline,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, as he lay upon the humbled gras,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His foot he set on his vile necke, in signe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of servile yoke, that nobler harts repine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, letting him arise like abject thrall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan to him objecl his haynous crime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to revile, and rate, and recreant call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lastly to despoyle of knightly bannerall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And after all, for greater infamie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He by the heeles him hung upon a tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And baffuld so, that all which passed by</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The picture of his punishment might see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by the like ensample warned bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How ever they through treason doe trespasse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But turne we now backe to that Ladie free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom late we left ryding upon an Asse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Led by a Carle and foole which by her side did passe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She was a Ladie of great dignitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lifted up to honorable place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Famous through all the land of Faerie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though of meane parentage and kindred base,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet deckt with wondrous giftes of natures grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all men did her person much admire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And praise the feature of her goodly face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The beames whereof did kindle lovely fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In th' harts of many a knight, and many a gentle squire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But she thereof grew proud and insolent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none she worthie thought to be her fere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But scornd them all that love unto her ment:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was she lov'd of many a worthy pere:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unworthy she to be belov'd so dere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That could not weigh of worthinesse aright;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For beautie is more glorious bright and clere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The more it is admir'd of many a wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And noblest she that served is of noblest knight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But this coy Damzell thought contrariwize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That such proud looks would make her praysed more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that, the more she did all love despize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The more would wretched lovers her adore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What cared she who sighed for her sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or who did wayle or watch the wearie night?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let them that list their lucklesse lot deplore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She was borne free, not bound to any wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so would ever live, and love her owne delight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Through such her stubborne stifnesse and hard hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Many a wretch for want of remedie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did languish long in life-consuming smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at the last through dreary dolour die:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whylest she, the Ladie of her libertie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did boast her beautie had such soveraine might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with the onely twinckle of her eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She could or save or spill whom she would hight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What could the Gods doe more, but doe it more aright?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But loe! the Gods, that mortall follies vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did worthily revenge this maydens pride;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, nought regarding her so goodly hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did laugh at her that many did deride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilest she did weepe, of no man mercifide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For on a day, when Cupid kept his court,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he is wont at each Saint Valentide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the which all lovers doe resort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That of their loves successe they there may make report;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It fortun'd then, that when the roules were red</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which the names of all loves folke were fyled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That many there were missing; which were ded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or kept in bands, or from their loves exyled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or by some other violence despoyled:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when as Cupid heard, he wexed wroth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doubting to be wronged or beguyled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He bad his eyes to be unblindfold both,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he might see his men, and muster them by oth.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then found he many missing of his crew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which wont doe suit and service to his might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whom what was becomen no man knew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore a Jurie was impaneld streight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T'enquire of them, whether by force, or sleight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or their owne guilt, they were away convayd?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom foule Infamie and fell Despight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gave evidence, that they were all betrayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And murdrcd cruelly by a rebellious Mayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Fayre Mirabella was her name, whereby</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all those crymes she there indited was:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which when Cupid heard, he by and by</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In great displeasure wild a Capias</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should issue forth t'attach that scornefull lasse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The warrant straight was made, and therewithall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Baylieffe-errant forth in post did passe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom they by name there Portamore did call;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He which doth summon lovers to loves judgement hall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The damzell was attacht, and shortly brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the barre whereas she was arrayned;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she thereto nould plead, nor answere ought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even for stubborne pride which her restrayned.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So judgement past, as is by law ordayned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In cases like; which when at last she saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her stubborne hart, which love before disdayned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan stoupe; and, falling downe with humble awe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cryde mercie, to abate the extremitie of law.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The sonne of Venus, who is myld by kynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But where he is provokt with peevishnesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto her prayers piteously enclynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did the rigour of his doome represse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet not so freely, but that nathelesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He unto her a penance did impose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which was, that through this worlds wyde wildernes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She wander should in companie of those,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till she had sav'd so many loves as she did lose.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So now she had bene wandring two whole yeares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throughout the world in this uncomely case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wasting her goodly hew in heavie teares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her good dayes in dolorous disgrace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet had she not in all these two yeares space</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saved but two; yet in two yeares before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through her dispiteous pride, whilest love lackt place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She had destroyed two and twenty more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aie me! how could her love make half amends therefore?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now she was uppon the weary way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When as the gentle Squire, with faire Serene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Met her in such misseeming foule array;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles that mighty man did her demeane</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all the evill termes and cruell meane</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he could make: And eeke that angry foole</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which follow'd her, with cursed hands uncleane</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whipping her horse, did with his smarting toole</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oft whip her dainty selfe, and much augment her doole.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne ought it mote availe her to entreat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The one or th'other better her to use;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For both so wilfull were and obstinate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all her piteous plaint they did refuse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rather did the more her beate and bruse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But most the former villaine, which did lead</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her tyreling jade, was bent her to abuse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, though she were with wearinesse nigh dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet would not let her lite, nor rest a little stead:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For he was sterne and terrible by nature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eeke of person huge and hideous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Exceeding much the measure of mans stature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rather like a Gyant monstruous:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For sooth he was descended of the hous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of those old Gyants, which did warres darraine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the heaven in order battailous;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sib to great Orgolio, which was slaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Arthure, when as Unas Knight he did maintaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His lookes were dreadfull, and his fiery eies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like two great Beacons, glared bright and wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Glauncing askew, as if his enemies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He scorned in his overweening pryde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stalking stately, like a Crane, did stryde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At every step uppon the tiptoes hie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, all the way he went, on every syde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gaz'd about and stared horriblie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if he with his lookes would all men terrific.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He wore no armour, ne for none did care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As no whit dreading any living wight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in a Jacket, quilted richly rare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon checklaton, he was straungely dight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on his head a roll of linnen plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to the Mores of Malaber, he wore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which his locks, as blacke as pitchy night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were bound about and voyded from before;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in his hand a mighty yron club he bore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This was Disdaine, who led that Ladies horse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through thick and thin, through mountains and through plains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Compelling her, where she would not, by force,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Haling her palfrey by the hempen raines:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that same foole, which most increast her paines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was Scorne; who having in his hand a whip,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her therewith yirks; and still, when she complaines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The more he laughes, and does her closely quip,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see her sore lament and bite her tender lip.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whose cruell handling when that Squire beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saw those villaines her so vildely use,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His gentle heart with indignation sweld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And could no lenger beare so great abuse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As such a Lady so to beate and bruse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, to him stepping, such a stroke him lent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That forst him th' halter from his hand to loose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And maugre all his might backe to relent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Else had he surely there bene slaine, or fowly shent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The villaine, wroth for greeting him so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gathered him selfe together soone againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his yron batton which he bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let drive at him so dreadfully amaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That for his safety he did him constraine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To give him ground, and shift to every side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rather then once his burden to sustaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For bootelesse thing him seemed to abide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So mighty blowes, or prove the puissaunce of his pride.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like as a Mastiffe having at a bay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A salvage Bull, whose cruell homes doe threat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Desperate daunger, if he them assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Traceth his ground, and round about doth beat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To spy where he may some advauntage get,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles the beast doth rage and loudly rore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So did the Squire, the whiles the Carle did fret</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fume in his disdainefull mynd the more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And oftentimes by Turmagant and Mahound swore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nathelesse so sharpely still he him pursewd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That at advantage him at last he tooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When his foote slipt, (that slip he dearely rewd)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his yron club to ground him strooke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where still he lay, ne out of swoune awooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till heavy hand the Carle upon him layd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bound him fast: Tho, when he up did looke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saw him selfe captiv'd, he was dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne powre had to withstand, ne hope of any ayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then up he made him rise, and forward fare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Led in a rope which both his hands did bynd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought that foole for pitty did him spare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with his whip, him following behynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him often scourg'd, and forst his feete to fynd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And other-whiles with bitter mockes and mowes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He would him scorne, that to his gentle mynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was much more grievous then the others blowes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Words sharpely wound, but greatest griefe of scorning growes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The faire Serena, when she saw him fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under that villaines club, then surely thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That slaine he was, or made a wretched thrall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fled away with all the speede she mought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke for safety; which long time she sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And past through many perils by the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere she againe to Calepine was brought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which discourse as now I must delay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till Mirabellaes fortunes I doe further say.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-8" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Prince Arthure overcomes Disdaine;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Quites Mirabell from dreed:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Serena, found of Salvages,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">By Calepine is freed.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Ye gentle Ladies, in whose soveraine powre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Love hath the glory of his kingdome left,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And th' hearts of men, as your eternall dowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In yron chaines of liberty bereft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Delivered hath into your hands by gift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be well aware how ye the same doe use,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">not to tyranny you lift;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least, if men you of cruelty accuse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>you take that chiefedome which ye doe abuse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And as ye soft and tender are by kynde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adornd with goodly gifts of beauties grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So be ye soft and tender eeke in mynde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But cruelty and hardnesse from you chace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all your other praises will deface,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from you turne the love of men to hate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ensample take of Mirabellaes case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who from the high degree of happy state</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fell into wretched woes, which she repented late.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who after thraldome of the gentle Squire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which she beheld with lamentable eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was touched with compassion entire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And much lamented his calamity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That for her sake fell into misery;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which booted nought for prayers nor for threat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hope for to release or mollify,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For aye the more that she did them entreat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The more they him misust, and cruelly did beat.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So as they forward on their way did pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him still reviling and afflicting sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They met Prince Arthure with Sir Enias,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(That was that courteous Knight, whom he before</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having subdew'd yet did to life restore;)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom as they approcht, they gan augment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their cruelty, and him to punish more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Scourging and haling him more vehement;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if it them should grieve to see his punishment.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Squire him selfe, when as he saw his Lord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The witnesse of his wretchednesse in place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was much asham'd that with an hempen cord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He like a dog was led in captive case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did his head for bashfulnesse abase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As loth to see or to be scene at all:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shame would be hid. But whenas Enias</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beheld two such, of two such villaines thrall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His manly mynde was much emmoved therewithall;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And to the Prince thus sayd: "See you, Sir Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The greatest shame that ever eye yet saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yond Lady and her Squire with foule despight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abusde, against all reason and all law,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without regard of pitty or of awe?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">See, how they doe that Squire beat and revile!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">See, how they doe the Lady hale and draw!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, if ye please to lend me leave awhile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will them soone acquite, and both of blame assoile."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Prince assented; and then he, streightway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dismounting light, his shield about him threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which approching thus he gan to say:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Abide, ye caytive treachetours untrew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That have with treason thralled unto you</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These two, unworthy of your wretched bands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now your crime with cruelty pursew!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abide, and from them lay your loathly hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or else abide the death that hard before you stands."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The villaine stayd not aunswer to invent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with his yron club preparing way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mindes sad message backe unto him sent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which descended with such dreadfull sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemed nought the course thereof could stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No more then lightening from the lofty sky:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne list the Knight the powre thereof assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose doome was death; but, lightly slipping by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unwares defrauded his intended destiny:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, to requite him with the like againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his sharpe sword he fiercely at him flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strooke so strongly, that the Carle with paine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saved him selfc but that he there him slew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet sav'd not so, but that the bloud it drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gave his foe good hope of victory:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who therewith flesht upon him set anew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with the second stroke thought certainely</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To have supplyde the first, and paide the usury.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Fortune aunswerd not unto his call;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, as his hand was heaved up on hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The villaine met him in the middle fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his club bet backe his brondyron bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So forcibly, that with his owne hands might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rebeaten backe upon himselfe againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He driven was to ground in selfe despight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whence ere he recovery could gaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He in his necke had set his foote with fell disdaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that the foole, which did that end awayte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came running in; and, whilest on ground he lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Laide heavy hands on him and held so strayte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That downe he kept him with his scornefull sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So as he could not weld him any way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles that other villaine went about</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him to have bound and thrald without delay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles the foole did him revile and flout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Threatning to yoke them two and tame their corage stout.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when a sturdy ploughman with his hynde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By strength have overthrowne a stubborne steare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They downe him hold, and fast with cords do bynde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till they him force the buxome yoke to beare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So did these two this Knight oft tug and teare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when the Prince beheld, there standing by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He left his lofty steede to aide him neare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, buckling soone him selfe, gan fiercely fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon that Carle to save his friend from jeopardy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The villaine, leaving him unto his mate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be captiv'd and handled as he list,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himselfe addrest unto this new debate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his club him all about so blist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he which way to turne him scarcely wist:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes aloft he layd, sometimes alow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now here, now there, and oft him neare he mist;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So doubtfully, that hardly one could know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether more wary were to give or ward the blow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But yet the Prince so well enured was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With such huge strokes, approved oft in fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That way to them he gave forth right to pas;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne would endure the daunger of their might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wayt advantage when they downe did light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last the caytive, after long discourse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When all his strokes he saw avoyded quite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Resolved in one t'assemble all his force,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make one end of him without ruth or remorse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His dreadfull hand he heaved up aloft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his dreadfull instrument of yre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thought sure have pownded him to powder soft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or deepe emboweld in the earth entyre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Fortune did not with his will conspire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, ere his stroke attayned his intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The noble childe, preventing his desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under his club with wary boldnesse went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And smote him on the knee that never yet was bent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It never yet was bent, ne bent it now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Albe the stroke so strong and puissant were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seem'd a marble pillour it could bow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all that leg, which did his body beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It crackt throughout, (yet did no bloud appeare,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So as it was unable to support</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So huge a burden on such broken geare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But fell to ground, like to a lumpe of durt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence he assayd to rise, but could not for his hurt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones the Prince to him full nimbly stept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And least he should recover foote againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His head meant from his shoulders to have swept.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when the Lady saw, she cryde amaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Stay, stay, Sir Knight! for love of God abstaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From that unwares ye weetlesse doe intend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Slay not that Carle, though worthy to be slaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For more on him doth then him selfe depend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My life will by his death have lamentable end."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He staide his hand according her desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet nathemore him suffred to arize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, still suppressing, gan of her inquire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What meaning mote those uncouth words comprize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in that villaines health her safety lies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, were no might in man, nor heart in Knights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which durst her dreaded reskue enterprize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet heavens them selves, that favour feeble rights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would for it selfe redresse, and punish such despights.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then bursting forth in teares, which gushed fast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like many water streames, awhile she stayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till the sharpe passion being overpast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her tongue to her restord, then thus she sayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Nor heavens, nor men, can me, most wretched mayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deliver from the doome of my desart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which the God of love hath on me layd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And damned to endure this direfull smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For penaunce of my proud and hard rebellious hart.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"In prime of youthly yeares, when first the flowre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of beauty gan to bud, and bloosme delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Nature me endu'd with plenteous dowre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all her gifts, that pleasde each living sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I was belov'd of many a gentle Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sude and sought with all the service dew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full many a one for me deepe groand and sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the dore of death for sorrow drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Complayning out on me that would not on them rew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But let them love that list, or live or die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me list not die for any lovers doole;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne list me leave my loved libertie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To pitty him that list to play the foole;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To love my selfe I learned had in schoole.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus I triumphed long in lovers paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, sitting carelesse on the scorners stoole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did laugh at those that did lament and plaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all is now repayd with interest againe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"For loe! the winged God that woundeth harts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Causde me be called to accompt therefore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for revengement of those wrongfull smarts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which I to others did inflict afore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Addeem'd me to endure this penaunce sore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in this wize, and this unmeete array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With these two lewd companions, and no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disdaine and Scorne, I through the world should stray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till I have sav'd so many as I earst did slay."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Certes," (sayd then the Prince) "the God is just,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That taketh vengeaunce of his peoples spoile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For were no law in love, but all that lust</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might them oppresse, and painefully turmoile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His kingdome would continue but a while.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But tell me, Lady, wherefore doe you beare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This bottle thus before you with such toile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eeke this wallet at your backe arreare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That for these Carles to carry much more comely were?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Here in this bottle" (sayd the sory Mayd)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"I put the tears of my contrition,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till to the brim I have it full defrayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in this bag, which I behinde me don,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I put repentaunce for things past and gon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet is the bottle leake, and bag so torne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all which I put in fals out anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And is behinde me trodden downe of Scorne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who mocketh all my paine, and laughs the more I mourn."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Infant hearkned wisely to her tale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wondred much at Cupids judg'ment wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That could so meekly make proud hearts avale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wreake him selfe on them that him despise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then suffred he Disdaine up to arise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who was not able up him selfe to reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By meanes his leg, through his late luckelesse prise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was crackt in twaine, but by his foolish feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was holpen up, who him supported standing neare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But being up he lookt againe aloft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if he never had received fall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with sterne eye-browes stared at him oft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if he would have daunted him withall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And standing on his tiptoes, to seeme tall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Downe on his golden feete he often gazed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if such pride the other could apall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who was so far from being ought amazed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he his lookes despised, and his boast dispraized.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then turning backe unto that captive thrall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who all this while stood there beside them bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unwilling to be knowne or scene at all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He from those bands weend him to have unwound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when approaching neare he plainely found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It was his owne true groome, the gentle Squire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He thereat wext exceedingly astound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him did oft embrace, and oft admire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne could with seeing satisfie his great desire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Meane-while the Salvage man, when he beheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That huge great foole oppressing th'other Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom with his weight unweldy downe he held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He flew upon him like a greedy kight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto some carrion offered to his sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, downc him plucking, with his nayles and teeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan him to hale, and teare, and scratch, and bite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, from him taking his owne whip, therewith</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So sore him scourgeth that the bloud downe followeth.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And sure I weene, had not the Ladies cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Procured the Prince his cruell hand to stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He would with whipping him have done to dye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But being checkt he did abstaine streightway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And let him rise. Then thus the Prince gan say:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Now, Lady, sith your fortunes thus dispose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That if ye list have liberty ye may;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto your selfe I freely leave to chose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether I shall you leave, or from these villaines lose."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ah! nay, Sir Knight," (said she) "it may not be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that I needes must by all meanes fulfill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This penaunce, which enjoyned is to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least unto me betide a greater ill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet no lesse thankes to you for your good will."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So humbly taking leave she turnd aside;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Arthure with the rest went onward still</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On his first quest, in which did him betide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A great adventure, which did him from them devide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But first it falleth me by course to tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of faire Serena; who, as earst you heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When first the gentle Squire at variaunce fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With those two Carles, fled fast away, afeard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of villany to be to her inferd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So fresh the image of her former dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet dwelling in her eye, to her appeard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That every foote did tremble which did tread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every body two, and two she foure did read.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Through hils and dales, through bushes and through breres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long thus she fled, till that at last she thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her selfe now past the perill of her feares:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then looking round about, and seeing nought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which doubt of daunger to her offer mought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She from her palfrey lighted on the plaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, sitting downe, her selfe awhile bethought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her long travell and turmoyling paine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And often did of love, and oft of lucke complaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And evermore she blamed Calepine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The good Sir Calepine, her owne true Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As th'onely author of her wofull tine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For being of his love to her so light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As her to leave in such a piteous plight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet never Turtle truer to his make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then he was tride unto his Lady bright;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who all this while endured for her sake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great perill of his life, and restlesse paines did take.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho when as all her plaints she had displayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And well disburdened her engrieved brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the grasse her selfe adowne she layd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where, being tyrde with travell, and opprest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sorrow, she betooke her selfe to rest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There whilest in Morpheus bosome safe she lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fearelesse of ought that mote her peace molest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">False Fortune did her safety betray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto a strange mischaunce that menac'd her decay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In these wylde deserts where she now abode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There dwelt a salvage nation, which did live</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of stealth and spoile, and making nightly rode</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into their neighbours borders; ne did give</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them selves to any trade, (as for to drive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The painefull plough, or cattell for to breed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or by adventrous marchandize to thrive,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But on the labours of poore men to feed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And serve their owne necessities with others need.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereto they usde one most accursed order,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To eate the flesh of men whom they mote fynde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And straungers to devoure, which on their border</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were brought by errour or by wreckfull wynde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A monstrous cruelty gainst course of kynde!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They, towards evening wandering every way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke for booty, came by fortune blynde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereas this Lady, like a sheepe astray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now drowned in the depth of sleepe all fearelesse lay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as they spide her, Lord! what gladfull glee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They made amongst them selves; but when her face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like the faire yvory shining they did see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each gan his fellow solace and embrace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For joy of such good hap by heavenly grace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan they to devize what course to take;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether to slay her there upon the place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or suffer her out of her sleepe to wake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then her eate attonce, or many meales to make.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The best advizement was, of bad, to let her</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sleepe out her fill without encomberment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For sleepe, they sayd, would make her battill better:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then when she wakt they all gave one consent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, since by grace of God she there was sent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto their God they would her sacrifize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose share, her guiltlesse bloud, they woul d present;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But of her dainty flesh they did devize</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make a common feast, and feed with gurmandize.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So round about her they them selves did place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the grasse, and diversely dispose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As each thought best to spend the lingring space:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some with their eyes the daintest morsels chose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some praise her paps; some praise her lips and nose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some whet their knives, and strip their elboes bare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Priest him selfe a garland doth compose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of finest flowers, and with full busie care</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His bloudy vessels wash, and holy fire prepare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Damzell wakes; then all attonce upstart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And round about her flocke, like many flies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whooping and hallowing on every part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if they would have rent the brasen skies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when she sees with ghastly griefful eies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her heart does quake, and deadly pallied hew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Benumbes her cheekes: Then out aloud she cries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where none is nigh to heare that will her rew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rends her golden locks, and snowy brests embrew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But all bootes not; they hands upon her lay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And first they spoile her of her jewels deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And afterwards of all her rich array;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which amongst them they in peeces teare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of the pray each one a part doth beare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now being naked, to their sordid eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The goodly threasures of nature appeare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which as they view with lustfull fantasyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each wisheth to him selfe, and to the rest envyes:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her yvorie neck; her alablaster Brest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her paps, which like white silken pillowes were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For love in soft delight thereon to rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her tender sides; her bellie white and clere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which like an Altar did itselfe uprere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To offer sacrifice divine thereon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her goodly thighes, whose glorie did appeare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like a triumphal Arch, and thereupon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The spoiles of Princes hang'd which were in battel won.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Those daintie parts, the dearlings of delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which mote not be prophan'd of common eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those villeins view'd with loose lascivious sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And closely tempted with their craftie spyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And some of them gan mongst themselves devize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereof by force to take their beastly pleasure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But them the Priest rebuking did advize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To dare not to pollute so sacred threasure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vow'd to the gods: religion held even theeves in measure.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So, being stayd, they her from thence directed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto a litle grove not farre asyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which an altar shortly they erected</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To slay her on. And now the Eventyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His brode black wings had through the heavens wyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By this dispred, that was the tyme ordayned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For such a dismall deed, their guilt to hyde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of few greene turfes an altar soone they fayned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And deckt it all with flowres which they nigh hand obtayned.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho, when as all things readie were aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Te Damzell was before the altar set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being alreadie dead with fearefull fright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom the Priest with naked armes full net</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Approching nigh, and murdrous knife well whet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan mutter close a certaine secret charme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With other divelish ceremonies met:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which doen, he gan aloft t'advance his arme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereat they shouted all, and made a loud alarme.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then gan the bagpypes and the homes to shrill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shrieke aloud, that, with the peoples voyce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Confused, did the ayre with terror fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made the wood to tremble at the noyce:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whyles she wayld, the more they did rejoyce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now mote ye understand that to this grove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir Calepine, by chaunce more then by choyce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The selfe same evening fortune hether drove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he to seeke Serena through the woods did rove.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Long had he sought her, and through many a soyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had traveld still on foot in heavie armes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought was tyred with his endlesse toyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought was feared of his certaine harmes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now, all weetlesse of the wretched stormes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which his love was lost, he slept full fast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till, being waked with these loud alarmes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He lightly started up like one aghast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, catching up his arms, streight to the noise forth past.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There by th'uncertaine glims of starry night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by the twinkling of their sacred fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He mote perceive a litle dawning sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all which there was doing in that quire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst whom a woman spoyld of all attire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He spyde lamenting her unluckie strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And groning sore from grieved hart entire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones he saw one with a naked knife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Readie to launch her brest, and let out loved life.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that he thrusts into the thickest throng</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, even as his right hand adowne descends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He him preventing layes on earth along,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sacrifizeth to th'infernall feends:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then to the rest his wrathfull hand he bends;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whom he makes such havocke and such hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That swarmes of damned soules to hell he sends:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rest, that scape his sword and death eschew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fly like a flocke of doves before a Faulcons vew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>From them returning to that Ladie backe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom by the Altar he doth sitting find</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet fearing death, and next to death the lacke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of clothes to cover what they ought by kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He first her hands beginneth to unbind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then to question of her present woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And afterwards to cheare with speaches kind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she, for nought that he could say or doe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One word durst speake, or answere him awhit thereto.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So inward shame of her uncomely case</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She did conceive, through care of womanhood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That though the night did cover her disgrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet she in so unwomanly a mood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would not bewray the state in which she stood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So all that night to him unknowen she past;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But day, that doth discover bad and good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ensewing, made her knowen to him at last:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The end whereof He keepe untill another cast.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-9" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Calidore hostes with Melibee,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And loves fayre Pastorell:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Coridon envies him, yet he,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">For ill, rewards him well.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now turne againe my teme, thou jolly swayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Backe to the furrow which I lately left.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I lately left a furrow, one or twayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unplough'd, the which my coulter hath not cleft;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet seem'd the soyle both fayre and frutefull eft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As I it past: that were too great a shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That so rich frute should be from us bereft;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besides the great dishonour and defame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which should befall to Calidores immortall name.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Great travell hath the gentle Calidore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And toyle endured, sith I left him last</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sewing the Blatant Beast; which I forebore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To finish then, for other present hast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full many pathes and perils he hath past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through hils, through dales, through forests, and through plaines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In that same quest which fortune on him cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he atchieved to his owne great gaines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reaping eternall glorie of his restlesse paines.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So sharply he the Monster did pursew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That day nor night he suffred him to rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne rested he himselfe, but natures dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For dread of daunger not to be redrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If he for slouth forslackt so famous quest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him first from court he to the citties coursed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from the citties to the townes him prest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from the townes into the countrie forsed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the country back to private farmes he scorsed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>From thence into the open fields he fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereas the Heardes were keeping of their neat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shepherds singing to their flockes (that fed)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Layes of sweete love and youthes delightfull heat:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him thether eke, for all his fearefull threat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He followed fast, and chaced him so nie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to the folds, where sheepe at night doe seat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the litle cots, where shepherds lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In winters wrathfull time, he forced him to flie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There on a day, as he pursew'd the chace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He chaunst to spy a sort of shepheard groomes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Playing on pipes and caroling apace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whyles their beasts there in the budded broomes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beside them fed, and nipt the tender bloomes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For other worldly wealth they cared nought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom Sir Calidore yet sweating comes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And them to tell him courteously besought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If such a beast they saw, which he had thether brought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They answer'd him that no such beast they saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor any wicked feend that mote offend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their happie flockes, nor daunger to them draw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if that such there were (as none they kend)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They prayd high God them farre from them to send.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then one of them, him seeing so to sweat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After his rusticke wise, that well he weend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Offred him drinke to quench his thirstie heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, if he hungry were, him offred eke to eat.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The knight was nothing nice, where was no need,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tooke their gentle offer: so adowne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They prayd him sit, and gave him for to feed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such homely what as serves the simple clowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That doth despise the dainties of the towne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, having fed his fill, he there besyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saw a faire damzell, which did wearc a crowne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of sundry flowres with silken ribbands tyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yclad in home-made greene that her owne hands had dyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Upon a litle hillocke she was placed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Higher then all the rest, and round about</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Environed with a girland, goodly graced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of lovely lasses; and them all without</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The lustie shepheard swaynes sate in a rout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which did pype and sing her prayses dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oft rejoyce, and oft for wonder shout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if some miracle of heavenly hew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were downe to them descended in that earthly vew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And soothly sure she was full fayre of face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And perfectly well shapt in every lim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which she did more augment with modest grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And comely carriage of her count'nance trim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the rest like lesser lamps did dim:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, her admiring as some heavenly wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did for their soveraine goddesse her esteeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, caroling her name both day and night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fayrest Pastorella her by name did hight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne was there heard, ne was there shepheards swayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But her did honour; and eke many a one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Burnt in her love, and with sweet pleasing payne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full many a night for her did sigh and grone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But most of all the shepheard Coridon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For her did languish, and his deare life spend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet neither she for him nor other none</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did care a whit, ne any liking lend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though meane her lot, yet higher did her mind ascend.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her whyles Sir Calidore there vewed well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And markt her rare demeanure, which him seemed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So farre the meane of shepheards to excell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As that he in his mind her worthy deemed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be a Princes Paragone esteemed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He was unwares surprisd in subtile bands</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the blynd boy; ne thence could be redeemed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By any skill out of his cruell hands;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Caught like the bird which gazing still on others stands.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So stood he still long gazing thereupon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne any will had thence to move away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Although his quest were farre afore him gon:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But after he had fed, yet did he stay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sate there still, untill the flying day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was farre forth spent, discoursing diversly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of sundry things as fell, to worke delay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evermore his speach he did apply</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To th' heards, but meant them to the damzels fantazy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By this the moystie night approching fast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her deawy humour gan on th'earth to shed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That warn'd the shepheards to their homes to hast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their tender flocks, now being fully fed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For feare of wetting them before their bed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then came to them a good old aged syre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose silver lockes bedeckt his beard and hed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With shepheards hooke in hand, and fit attyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That wild the damzell rise; the day did now expyre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He was, to weet, by common voice esteemed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The father of the fayrest Pastorell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of her selfe in very deede so deemed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was not so; but, as old stories tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Found her by fortune, which to him befell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In th'open fields an Infant left alone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, taking up, brought home and noursed well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As his owne chyld; for other he had none;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she in trad: of time accompted was his owne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She at his bidding meekely did arise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And streight unto her litle flocke did fare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then all the rest about her rose likewise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And each his sundrie sheepe with severall care</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gathered together, and them homeward bare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whylest everie one with helping hands did strive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst themselves, and did their labours share,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To helpc faire Pastorella home to drive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her fleecie flocke; but Coridon most helpe did give.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Meliboee (so hight that good old man)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now seeing Calidore left all alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And night arrived hard at hand, began</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him to invite unto his simple home;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which though it were a cottage clad with lome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all things therein meane, yet better so</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To lodge then in the salvage fields to rome.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The knight full gladly soone agreed thereto,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Being his harts owne wish,) and home with him did go.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There he was wclcom'd of that honest syre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of his aged Beldame homely well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who him besought himselfe to disattyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rest himselfe till supper time befell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which home came the fayrest Pastorell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After her flocke she in their fold had tyde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And supper readie dight they to it fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With small adoe, and nature satisfyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which doth litle crave contented to abyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho when they had their hunger slaked well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the fayre mayd the table ta'ne away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gentle knight, as he that did excell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In courtesie and well could doe and say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For so great kindnesse as he found that day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan greatly thanke his host and his good wife;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And drawing thence his speach another way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan highly to commend the happie life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which Shepheards lead, without debate or bitter strife.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"How much" (sayd he) "more happie is the state</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which ye, father, here doe dwell at ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Leading a life so free and fortunate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From all the tempests of these worldly seas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which tosse the rest in daungerous disease;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where warres, and wreckes, and wicked enmitie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe them afflict, which no man can appease;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That certes I your happinesse envie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wish my lot were plast in such felicitie."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Surely, my sonne," (then answer'd he againe)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"If happie, then it is in this intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That having small yet doe I not complaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of want, ne wish for more it to augment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But doe my selfe with that I have content;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So taught of nature, which doth litle need</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of forreine helpes to lifes due nourishment:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fields my food, my flocke my rayment breed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No better doe I weare, no better doe I feed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Therefore I doe not any one envy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor am envyde of any one therefore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They, that have much, feare much to loose thereby,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And store of cares doth follow riches store.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The litle that I have growes dayly more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without my care, but onely to attend it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My lambes doe every yeare increase their score,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And my flockes father daily doth amend it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What have I, but to praise th'Almighty that doth send it!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"To them that list the worlds gay showes I leave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to great ones such follies doe forgive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which oft through pride do their owne perill weave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through ambition downe themselves doe drive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sad decay, that might contented live.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me no such cares nor combrous thoughts offend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne once my minds unmoved quiet grieve;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all the night in silver sleepe I spend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the day to what I list I doe attend.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Sometimes I hunt the Fox, the vowed foe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto my Lambes, and him dislodge away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometime the fawne I practise from the Doe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or from the Goat her kidde, how to convay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another while I baytes and nets display</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The birds to catch, or fishes to beguyle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when I wearie am, I downe doe lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My limbes in every shade to rest from toyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drinke of every brooke when thirst my throte doth boyle.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"The time was once, in my first prime of yeares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When pride of youth forth pricked my desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I disdain'd amongst mine equall peares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To follow sheepe and shepheards base attire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For further fortune then I would inquire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, leaving home, to roiall court I sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where I did sell my selfe for yearely hire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the Princes gardin daily wrought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There I beheld such vainenesse as I never thought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"With sight whereof soone cloyd, and long deluded</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With idle hopes which them doe entertaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After I had ten yeares my selfe excluded</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From native home, and spent my youth in vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I gan my follies to my selfe to plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And this sweet peace, whose lacke did then appeare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, backe returning to my sheepe againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I from thenceforth have learn'd to love more deare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This lowly quiet life which I inherite here."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whylest thus he talkt, the knight with greedy eare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hong still upon his melting mouth attent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose sensefull words empierst his hart so neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he was rapt with double ravishment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both of his speach, that wrought him great content,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And also of the object of his vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which his hungry eye was alwayes bent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That twixt his pleasing tongue, and her faire hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He lost himselfe, and like one halfe entraunced grew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet to occasion meanes to worke his mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to insinuate his harts desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He thus replyde: "Now surely, syre, I find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all this worlds gay showes, which we admire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be but vaine shadowes to this safe retyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of life, which here in lowlinesse ye lead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fearelesse of foes, or fortunes wrackfull yre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which tosseth states, and under foot doth tread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mightie ones, affrayd of every chaunges dread.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"That even I, which daily doe behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The glorie of the great mongst whom I won,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now have prov'd what happinesse ye hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In this small plot of your dominion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now loath great Lordship and ambition;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wish th' heavens so much had graced mee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As graunt me live in like condition;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that my fortunes might transposed bee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From pitch of higher place unto this low degree."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"In vaine" (said then old Melibce) "doe men</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The heavens of their fortunes fault accuse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith they know best what is the best for them;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For they to each such fortune doe diffuse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As they doe know each can most aptly use:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For not that which men covet most is best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor that thing worst which men do most refuse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But fittest is, that all contented rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With that they hold: each hath his fortune in his brest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"It is the mynd that maketh good or ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That maketh wretch or happie, rich or poore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For some, that hath abundance at his will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath not enough, but wants in greatest store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And other, that hath litle, askes no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in that litle is both rich and wise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For wisedome is most riches: fooles therefore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They are which fortunes doe by vowes devize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sith each unto himselfe his life may fortunize."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Since then in each mans self" (said Calidore)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"It is to fashion his owne lyfes estate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Give leave awhyle, good father, in this shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To rest my barcke, which hath bene beaten late</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With stormes of fortune and tempestuous fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In seas of troubles and of toylesome paine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, whether quite from them for to retrate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I shall resolve, or backe to turne againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I may here with your selfe some small repose obtaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Not that the burden of so bold a guest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall chargefull be, or chaunge to you at all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For your meane food shall be my daily feast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And this your cabin both my bowre and hall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besides, for recompence hereof I shall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You well reward, and golden guerdon give,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That may perhaps you better much withall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in this quiet make you safer live."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So forth he drew much gold, and toward him it drive.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But the good man, nought tempted with the offer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his rich mould, did thrust it farre away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thus bespake: "Sir knight, your bounteous proffer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be farre fro me, to whom ye ill display</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That mucky masse, the cause of mens decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That mote empaire my peace with daungers dread;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, if ye algates covet to assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This simple sort of life that shepheards lead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be it your owne: our rudenesse to your selfe aread."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So there that night Sir Calidore did dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And long while after, whilest him list remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dayly beholding the faire Pastorell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And feeding on the bayt of his owne bane:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">During which time he did her entertaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all kind courtesies he could invent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every day, her companie to gaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When to the field she went he with her went:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So for to quench his fire he did it more augment.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But she that never had acquainted beene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With such queint usage, fit for Queenes and Kings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever had such knightly service scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, being bred under base shepheards wings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had ever learn'd to love the lowly things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did litle whit regard his courteous guize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But cared more for Colins carolings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then all that he could doe, or ever devize:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His layes, his loves, his lookes, she did them all despize.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which Calidore perceiving, thought it best</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To chaunge the manner of his loftie looke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doffing his bright armes himselfe addrest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In shepheards weed; and in his hand he tooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Instead of steele-head speare, a shepheards hooke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That who had scene him then, would have bethought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On Phrygian Paris by Plexippus brooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When he the love of fayre Oenone sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What time the golden apple was unto him brought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So being clad unto the fields he went</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the faire Pastorella every day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And kept her sheepe with diligent attent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Watching to drive the ravenous Wolfe away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whylest at pleasure she mote sport and play;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every evening helping them to fold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And otherwhiles, for need, he did assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his strong hand their rugged teats to hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And out of them to presse the milke: love so much could.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which seeing Coridon, who her likewise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long time had lov'd, and hop'd her love to gaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He much was troubled at that straungers guize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many gealous thoughts conceiv'd in vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That this of all his labour and long paine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should reap the harvest ere it ripened were:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That made him scoule, and pout, and oft complaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Pastorell to all the shepheards there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she did love a stranger swayne then him more dere.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And ever, when he came in companie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where Calidore was present, he would loure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And byte his lip, and even for gealousie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was readie oft his owne heart to devoure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Impatient of any paramoure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, on the other side, did seeme so farre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From malicing, or grudging his good houre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all he could he graced him with her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne ever shewed signe of rancour or of jarre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And oft, when Coridon unto her brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or litle sparrowes stolen from their nest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or wanton squirrels in the woods farre sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or other daintie thing for her addrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He would commend his guift, and make the best;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet she no whit his presents did regard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne him could find to fancie in her brest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This new-come shepheard had his market mard.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old love is litle worth when new is more prefard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One day, when as the shepheard swaynes together</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were met to make their sports and merrie glee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As they are wont in faire sunshynie weather,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles their flockes in shadowes shrouded bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They fell to daunce: then did they all agree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Colin Clout should pipe, as one most fit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Calidore should lead the ring, as hee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That most in Pastorellaes grace did sit:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereat frown'd Coridon, and his lip closely bit.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Calidore, of courteous inclination,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tooke Coridon and set him in his place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he should lead the daunce, as was his fashion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Coridon could daunce, and trimly trace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when as Pastorella, him to grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her flowry garlond tooke from her owne head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And plast on his, he did it soone displace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did it put on Coridons instead:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Coridon woxe frollicke, that earst seemed dead.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Another time, when as they did dispose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To practise games and maisteries to try,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They for their Judge did Pastorella chose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A garland was the meed of victory:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There Coridon forth stepping openly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did chalenge Calidore to wrestling game;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he, through long and perfect industry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therein well practisd was, and in the same</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thought sure t'avenge his grudge, and worke his foe great shame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Calidore he greatly did mistake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he was strong and mightily stiffe pight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with one fall his necke he almost brake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And had he not upon him fallen light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His dearest joynt he sure had broken quight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then was the oaken crowne by Pastorell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Given to Calidore as his due right;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he, that did in courtesie excell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gave it to Coridon, and said he wonne it well.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus did the gentle knight himselfe abeare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst that rusticke rout in all his deeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That even they, the which his rivals were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could not maligne him, but commend him needs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For courtesie amongst the rudest breeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Good will and favour. So it surely wrought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With this faire Mayd, and in her mynde the seeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of perfect love did sow, that last forth brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fruite of joy and blisse, though long time dearely bought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus Calidore continu'd there long time</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To winne the love of the faire Pastorell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which having got, he used without crime</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or blamefull blot; but menaged so well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he, of all the rest which there did dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was favoured and to her grace commended.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But what straunge fortunes unto him befell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere he attain'd the point by him intended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall more conveniently in other place be ended.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-10" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Calidore sees the Graces dance</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To Colins melody:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The whiles his Pastorell is led</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Into captivity.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Who now does follow the foule Blatant Beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilest Calidore does follow that faire Mayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unmyndfull of his vow, and high beheast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which by the Faery Queene was on him layd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he should never leave, nor be delayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From chacing him, till he had it attchieved?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now, entrapt of love, which him betrayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He mindeth more how he may be relieved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With grace from her, whose love his heart hath sore engrieved.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That from henceforth he meanes no more to sew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His former quest, so full of toile and paine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another quest, another game in vew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He hath, the guerdon of his love to gaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With whom he myndes for ever to remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And set his rest amongst the rusticke sort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rather then hunt still after shadowes vaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of courtly favour, fed with light report</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of every blaste, and sayling alwaies in the port.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne certes mote he greatly blamed be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From so high step to stoupe unto so low;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For who had tasted once (as oft did he)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The happy peace which there doth overflow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And prov'd the perfect pleasures which doe grow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst poore hyndes, in hils, in woods, in dales,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would never more delight in painted show</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of such false blisse, as there is set for stales</span>
					<br/>
					<span>T'entrap unwary fooles in their eternall bales.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For what hath all that goodly glorious gaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to one sight which Calidore did vew?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The glaunce whereof their dimmed eies would daze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That never more they should endure the shew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that sunne-shine that makes them looke askew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought, in all that world of beauties rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Save onely Glorianaes heavenly hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which what can compare?) can it compare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which, as commeth now by course, I will declare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One day, as he did raunge the fields abroad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilest his faire Pastorella was elsewhere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He chaunst to come, far from all peoples troad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto a place whose pleasaunce did appere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To passe all others on the earth which were:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all that ever was by natures skill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Devized to worke delight was gathered there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there by her were poured forth at fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if, this to adorne, she all the rest did pill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It was an hill plaste in an open plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That round about was bordered with a wood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of matchlesse night, that seem'd th'earth to disdaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which all trees of honour stately stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did all winter as in sommer bud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spredding pavilions for the birds to bowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which in their lower braunches sung aloud;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in their tops the soring hauke did towre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sitting like King of fowles in majesty and powre:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And at the foote thereof a gentle flud</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His silver waves did softly tumble downe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unmard with ragged mosse or filthy mud;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne mote wylde beastes, ne mote the ruder clowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereto approch; ne filth mote therein drowne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Nymphes and Faeries by the bancks did sit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the woods shade which did the waters crowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Keeping all noysome things away from it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the waters fall tuning their accents fit.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And on the top thereof a spacious plaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did spred it selfe, to serve to all delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Either to daunce, when they to daunce would faine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or else to course about their bases light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought there wanted which for pleasure might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Desired be, or thence to banish bale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So pleasauntly the hill with equall hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did seeme to overlooke the lowly vale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore it rightly cleeped was mount Acidale.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They say that Venus, when she did dispose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her selfe to pleasaunce, used to resort</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto this place, and therein to repose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rest her selfe as in a gladsome port,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or with the Graces there to play and sport;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That even her owne Cytheron, though in it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She used most to keepe her royall court,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in her soveraine Majesty to sit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She in regard hereof refusde and thought unfit.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Unto this place when as the Elfin Knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Approcht, him seemed that the merry sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of a shrill pipe he playing heard on hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many feete fast thumping th' hollow ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That through the woods their Eccho did rebound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He nigher drew to weete what mote it be:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There he a troupe of Ladies dauncing found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full merrily, and making gladfull glee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the midst a Shepheard piping he did see.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He durst not enter into th'open greene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For dread of them unwares to be descryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For breaking of their daunce, if he were scene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in the covert of the wood did byde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beholding all, yet of them unespyde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There he did see that pleased much his sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That even he him selfe his eyes envyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An hundred naked maidens lilly white</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All raunged in a ring and dauncing in delight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All they without were raunged in a ring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And daunced round; but in the midst of them</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Three other Ladies did both daunce and sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whilest the rest them round about did hemme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And like a girlond did in compasse stemme:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the middest of those same three was placed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another Damzell, as a precious gemme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amidst a ring most richly well enchaced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That with her goodly presence all the rest much graced.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Looke! how the crowne, which Ariadne wore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon her yvory forehead, that same day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Theseus her unto his bridale bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When the bold Centaures made that bloudy fray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the fierce Lapithes which did them dismay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being now placed in the firmament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through the bright heaven doth her beams display,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And is unto the starres an ornament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which round about her move in order excellent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such was the beauty of this goodly band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose sundry parts were here too long to tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she that in the midst of them did stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seem'd all the rest in beauty to excell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Crownd with a rosie girlond that right well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did her beseeme: And ever, as the crew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About her daunst, sweet flowres that far did smell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fragrant odours they uppon her threw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But most of all those three did her with gifts endew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Those were the Graces, daughters of delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Handmaides of Venus, which are wont to haunt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uppon this hill, and daunce there day and night:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those three to men all gifts of grace do graunt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all that Venus in her selfe doth vaunt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is borrowed of them. But that faire one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in the midst was placed paravaunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was she to whom that shepheard pypt alone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That made him pipe so merrily, as never none.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She was, to weete, that jolly Shepheards lasse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which piped there unto that merry rout;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That jolly shepheard, which there piped, was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Poore Colin Clout, (who knowes not Colin Clout?)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He pypt apace, whilest they him daunst about.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pype, jolly shepheard, pype thou now apace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto thy love that made thee low to lout:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy love is present there with thee in place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy love is there advaunst to be another Grace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Much wondred Calidore at this straunge sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose like before his eye had never scene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And standing long astonished in spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rapt with pleasaunce, wist not what to weene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether it were the traine of beauties Queene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or Nymphes, or Faeries, or enchaunted show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which his eyes mote have deluded beene.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore, resolving what it was to know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of the wood he rose, and toward them did go.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, soone as he appeared to their vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They vanisht all away out of his sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cleane were gone, which way he never knew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All save the shepheard, who, for fell despight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that displeasure, broke his bag-pipe quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made great mone for that unhappy turne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Calidore, though no lesse sory wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that mishap, yet seeing him to mourne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drew neare, that he the truth of all by him mote learne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, first him greeting, thus unto him spake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Haile, jolly shepheard, which thy joyous dayes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here leadest in this goodly merry-make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Frequented of these gentle Nymphes alwayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to thee flocke to heare thy lovely layes!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tell me, what mote these dainty Damzells be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which here with thee doe make their pleasant playes?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right happy thou that mayst them freely see!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But why, when I them saw, fled they away from me?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Not I so happy," answerd then that swaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"As thou unhappy, which them thence didst chace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom by no meanes thou canst recall againe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, being gone, none can them bring in place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But whom they of them selves list so to grace."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Right sory I," (saide then Sir Calidore)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"That my ill fortune did them hence displace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But since things passed none may now restore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell me what were they all, whose lacke thee grieves so sore?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho gan that shepheard thus for to dilate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Then wote, thou shepheard, whatsoever thou bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all those Ladies, which thou sawest late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are Venus Damzels, all within her fee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But differing in honour and degree:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They all are Graces which on her depend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besides a thousand more which ready bee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her to adorne, when so she forth doth wend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But those three in the midst doe chiefe on her attend.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"They are the daughters of sky-ruling Jove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By him begot of faire Eurynome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Oceans daughter, in this pleasant grove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he, this way comming from feastfull glee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Thetis wedding with Aeacidee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In sommers shade him selfe here rested weary:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The first of them hight mylde Euphrosyne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Next faire Aglaia, last Thalia merry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweete Goddesses all three, which me in mirth do cherry!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"These three on men all gracious gifts bestow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which decke the body or adorne the mynde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make them lovely or well-favoured show;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As comely carriage, entertainement kynde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sweete semblaunt, friendly offices that bynde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the complements of curtesie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They teach us how to each degree and kynde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We should our selves demeane, to low, to hie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To friends, to foes; which skill men call Civility.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Therefore they alwaies smoothly seeme to smile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That we likewise should mylde and gentle be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And also naked are, that without guile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or false dissemblaunce all them plaine may see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Simple and true, from covert malice free;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eeke them selves so in their daunce they bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That two of them still froward seem'd to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But one still towards shew'd her selfe afore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That good should from us goe, then come, in greater store.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Such were those Goddesses which ye did see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that fourth Mayd, which there amidst them traced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who can aread what creature mote she bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether a creature, or a goddesse graced</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With heavenly gifts from heven first enraced?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But what so sure she was, she worthy was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be the fourth with those three other placed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was she certes but a countrey lasse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet she all other countrey lasses farre did passe:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"So farre, as doth the daughter of the day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All other lesser lights in light excell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So farre doth she in beautyfull array</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above all other lasses beare the bell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne lesse in vertue that beseemes her well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth she exceede the rest of all her race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which the Graces, that here wont to dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have for more honor brought her to this place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And graced her so much to be another Grace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Another Grace she well deserves to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In whom so many Graces gathered are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Excelling much the meane of her degree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Divine resemblaunce, beauty soveraine rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Firme Chastity, that spight ne blemish dare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which she with such courtesie doth grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all her peres cannot with her compare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But quite are dimmed when she is in place:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She made me often pipe, and now to pipe apace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Sunne of the world, great glory of the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the earth doest lighten with thy rayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great Gloriana, greatest Majesty!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pardon thy shepheard, mongst so many layes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he hath sung of thee in all his dayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make one minime of thy poore handmayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And underneath thy feete to place her prayse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That when thy glory shall be farre displayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To future age, of her this mention may be made!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When thus that shepheard ended had his speach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sayd Calidore: "Now sure it yrketh mee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to thy blisse I made this luckelesse breach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As now the author of thy bale to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus to bereave thy loves deare sight from thee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, gentle Shepheard, pardon thou my shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who rashly sought that which I mote not see."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus did the courteous Knight excuse his blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to recomfort him all comely meanes did frame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In such discourses they together spent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long time, as fit occasion forth them led;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which the Knight him selfe did much content,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with delight his greedy fancy fed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both of his words, which he with reason red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And also of the place, whose pleasures rare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With such regard his sences ravished,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That thence he had no will away to fare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But wisht that with that shepheard he mote dwelling share.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But that envenimd sting, the which of yore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His poysnous point deepe fixed in his hart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had left, now gan afresh to rancle sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to renue the rigour of his smart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to recure no skill of Leaches art</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mote him availe, but to returne againe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To his wounds worker, that with lovely dart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dinting his brest had bred his restlesse paine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like as the wounded Whale to shore flies from the maine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So, taking leave of that same gentle Swaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He backe returned to his rusticke wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where his faire Pastorella did remaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whome, in sort as he at first begonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He daily did apply him selfe to donne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All dewfull service, voide of thoughts impure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne any paines ne perill did he shonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which he might her to his love allure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And liking in her yet untamed heart procure.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And evermore the shepheard Coridon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What ever thing he did her to aggrate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did strive to match with strong contention,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all his paines did closely emulate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether it were to caroll, as they sate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Keeping their sheepe, or games to exercize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or to present her with their labours late;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through which if any grace chaunst to arize</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To him, the Shepheard streight with jealousie did frize.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One day, as they all three together went</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the greene wood to gather strawberies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There chaunst to them a dangerous accident:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Tigre forth out of the wood did rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with fell clawes full of fierce gourmandize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And greedy mouth wide gaping like hell-gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did runne at Pastorell her to surprize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom she beholding, now all desolate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gan cry to them aloud to helpe her all too late.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which Coridon first hearing ran in hast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To reskue her; but, when he saw the feend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through cowherd feare he fled away as fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne durst abide the daunger of the end;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His life he steemed dearer then his frend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Calidore soone comming to her ayde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When he the beast saw ready now to rend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His loves deare spoile, in which his heart was prayde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He ran at him enraged, instead of being frayde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He had no weapon but his shepheards hooke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To serve the vengeaunce of his wrathfull will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which so sternely he the monster strooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to the ground astonished he fell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence, ere he could recou'r, he did him quell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, hewing off his head, he it presented</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before the feete of the faire Pastorell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, scarcely yet from former feare exempted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thousand times him thankt that had her death prevented.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>From that day forth she gan him to affecl:,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And daily more her favour to augment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Coridon for cowherdize reject,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fit to keepe sheepe, unfit for loves content:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gentle heart scornes base disparagement.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet Calidore did not despise him quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But usde him friendly for further intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That by his fellowship he colour might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both his estate and love from skill of any wight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So well he wood her, and so well he wrought her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With humble service, and with daily sute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That at the last unto his will he brought her;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he so wisely well did prosecute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of his love he reapt the timely frute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And joyed long in close felicity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till fortune, fraught with malice, blinde and brute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That envies lovers long prosperity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blew up a bitter storme of foule adversity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It fortuned one day, when Calidore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was hunting in the woods, (as was his trade)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A lawlesse people, Brigants hight of yore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That never usde to live by plough nor spade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But fed on spoile and booty, which they made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon their neighbours which did nigh them border,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dwelling of these shepheards did invade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And spoyld their houses, and them selves did murder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drove away their flocks; with other much disorder.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Amongst the rest, the which they then did pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They spoyld old Melibee of all he had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all his people captive led away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst which this lucklesse mayd away was lad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Pastorella, sorrowfull and sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most sorrowfull, most sad, that ever sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now made the spoile of theeves and Brigants bad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which was the conquest of the gentlest Knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ever liv'd, and th'onely glory of his might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With them also was taken Coridon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And carried captive by those theeves away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who in the covert of the night, that none</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mote them descry, nor reskue from their pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto their dwelling did them close convay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their dwelling in a little Island was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Covered with shrubby woods, in which no way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Appeard for people in nor out to pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor any footing fynde for overgrowen gras:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For underneath the ground their way was made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through hollow caves, that no man mote discover</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the thicke shrubs, which did them alwaies shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From view of living wight and covered over;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But darkenesse dred and daily night did hover</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through all the inner parts, wherein they dwelt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne lightned was with window, nor with lover,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with continuall candle-light, which delt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A doubtfull sense of things, not so well scene as felt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hither those Brigants brought their present pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And kept them with continuall watch and ward;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Meaning, so soone as they convenient may,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For slaves to sell them for no small reward</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Merchants, which them kept in bondage hard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or sold againe. Now when faire Pastorell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into this place was brought, and kept with gard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of griesly theeves, she thought her self in hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where with such damned fiends she should in darknesse dwell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But for to tell the dolefull dreriment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pittifull complaints which there she made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where day and night she nought did but lament</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her wretched life shut up in deadly shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And waste her goodly beauty, which did fade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to a flowre that feeles no heate of sunne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which may her feeble leaves with comfort glade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And what befell her in that theevish wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will in another Canto better be begonne.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-11" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The Theeves fall out for Pastorell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Whilest Melibee is slaine;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her Calidore from them redeemes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And bringeth backe again.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The joyes of love, if they should ever last</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without affliction or disquietnesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That worldly chaunces doe amongst them cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would be on earth too great a blessednesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Liker to heaven then mortall wretchednesse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore the winged God, to let men weet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That here on earth is no sure happinesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A thousand sowres hath tempred with one sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make it seeme more deare and dainty, as is meet.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like as is now befalne to this faire Mayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Pastorell, of whom is now my song:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who being now in dreadfull darknesse layd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst those theeves, which her in bondage strong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Detaynd, yet Fortune, not with all this wrong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Contented, greater mischiefe on her threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sorrowes heapt on her in greater throng;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That who so heares her heavinesse, would rew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pitty her sad plight, so chang'd from pleasaunt hew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whylest thus she in these hellish dens remayned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wrapped in wretched cares and hearts unrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It so befell, (as Fortune had ordayned)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he which was their Capitaine profest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And had the chiefe commaund of all the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One day, as he did all his prisoners vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With lustfull eyes beheld that lovely guest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Pastorella, whose sad mournefull hew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like the faire Morning clad in misty fog did shew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At sight whereof his barbarous heart was fired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And inly burnt with flames most raging whot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her alone he for his part desired</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the other pray which they had got,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her in mynde did to him selfe allot.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From that day forth he kyndnesse to her showed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sought her love by all the meanes he mote;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With looks, with words, with gifts he oft her wowed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mixed threats among, and much unto her vowed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But all that ever he could doe or say</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her constant mynd could not a whit remove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor draw unto the lure of his lewd lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To graunt him favour or afford him love:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet ceast he not to sew, and all waies prove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which he mote accomplish his request,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saying and doing all that mote behove;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne day nor night he suffred her to rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But her all night did watch, and all the day molest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last, when him she so importune saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fearing least he at length the raines would lend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto his lust, and make his will his law,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith in his powre she was to foe or frend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She thought it best, for shadow to pretend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some shew of favour, by him gracing small,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she thereby mote either freely wend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or at more ease continue there his thrall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little well is lent that gaineth more withall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So from thenceforth, when love he to her made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With better tearmes she did him entertaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which gave him hope, and did him halfe perswade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he in time her joyance should obtaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when she saw through that small favours gaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That further then she willing was he prest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She found no meanes to barre him, but to faine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A sodaine sickenesse which her sore opprest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made unfit to serve his lawlesse mindes behest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By meanes whereof she would not him permit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Once to approch to her in privity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But onely mongst the rest by her to sit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mourning the rigour of her malady,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seeking all things meete for remedy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she resolv'd no remedy to fynde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor better cheare to shew in misery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till Fortune would her captive bonds unbynde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her sickenesse was not of the body, but the mynde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>During which space that she thus sicke did lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It chaunst a sort of merchants, which were wount</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To skim those coastes for bondmen there to buy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by such trafficke after gaines to hunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arrived in this Isle, though bare and blunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T'inquire for slaves; where being readie met</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By some of these same theeves at the instant brunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were brought unto their Captaine, who was set</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By his faire patients side with sorrowfull regret.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom they shewed, how those marchants were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arriv'd in place their bondslaves for to buy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therefore prayd that those same captives there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mote to them for their most commodity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be sold, and mongst them shared equally.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This their request the Captaine much appalled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet could he not their just demaund deny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And willed streight the slaves should forth be called,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sold for most advantage, not to be forstalled.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then forth the good old Meliboe was brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Coridon with many other moe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom they before in diverse spoyles had caught;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which he to the marchants sale did showe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till some, which did the sundry prisoners knowe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan to inquire for that faire shepherdesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with the rest they tooke not long agoe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gan her forme and feature to expresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The more t'augment her price through praise of comlinesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom the Captaine in full angry wize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made answere, that the mayd of whom they spake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was his owne purchase and his onely prize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which none had to doe, ne ought partake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he himselfe which did that conquest make:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Litle for him to have one silly lasse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besides, through sicknesse now so wan and weake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nothing meet in merchandise to passe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So shew'd them her, to prove how pale and weake she was.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The sight of whom, though now decayd and mard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke but hardly scene by candle-light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, like a Diamond of rich regard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In doubtfull shadow of the darkesome night</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With starrie beames about her shining bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These marchants fixed eyes did so amaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That what through wonder, and what through delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A while on her they greedily did gaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And did her greatly like, and did her greatly praize.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last when all the rest them offred were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And prises to them placed at their pleasure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They all refused in regard of her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought would buy, how ever prisd with measure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withouten her, whose worth above all threasure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They did esteeme, and offred store of gold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But then the Captaine, fraught with more displeasure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bad them be still; his love should not be sold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rest take if they would; he her to him would hold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith some other of the chiefest theeves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Boldly him bad such injurie forbeare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that same mayd, how ever it him greeves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should with the rest be sold before him theare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make the prises of the rest more deare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with great rage he stoutly doth denay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, fiercely drawing forth his blade, doth sweare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That who so hardie hand on her doth lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It dearely shall aby, and death for handsell pay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus, as they words amongst them multiply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They fall to strokes, the frute of too much talke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the mad steele about doth fiercely fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not sparing wight, ne leaving any balke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But making way for death at large to walke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, in the horror of the griesly night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In thousand dreadful shapes doth mongst them stalke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And makes huge havocke; whiles the candle-light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out quenched leaves no skill nor difference of wight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like a sort of hungry dogs, ymet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About some carcase by the common way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe fall together, stryving each to get</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The greatest portion of the greedie pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All on confused heapes themselves assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And snatch, and byte, and rend, and tug, and teare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That who them sees would wonder at their fray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And who sees not would be affrayd to heare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such was the conflict of those cruell Brigants there.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But first of all their captives they doe kill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least they should joyne against the weaker side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or rise against the remnant at their will:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Old Meliboe is slaine; and him beside</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His aged wife, with many others wide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Coridon, escaping craftily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Creepes forth of dores, whilst darknes him doth hide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And flyes away as fast as he can hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne stayeth leave to take before his friends doe dye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Pastorella, wofull wretched Elfe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was by the Captaine all this while defended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, minding more her safety then himselfe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His target alwayes over her pretended;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By means whereof, that mote not be amended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He at the length was slaine and layd on ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet holding fast twixt both his armes extended</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayre Pastorell, who, with the selfe same wound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Launcht through the arme, fell down with him in drerie swound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There lay she covered with confused preasse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of carcases, which dying on her fell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, when as he was dead, the fray gan ceasse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And each to other calling did compell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To stay their cruell hands from slaughter fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith they that were the cause of all were gone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereto they all attonce agreed well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, lighting candles new, gan search anone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How many of their friends were slaine, how many fone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Their Captaine there they cruelly found kild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his armes the dreary dying mayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like a sweet Angell twixt two clouds uphild;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her lovely light was dimmed and decayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With cloud of death upon her eyes displayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet did the cloud make even that dimmed light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeme much more lovely in that darknesse layd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And twixt the twinckling of her eye-lids bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sparke out litle beames, like starres in foggie night.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when they mov'd the carcases aside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They found that life did yet in her remaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then all their helpes they busily applyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To call the soule backe to her home againe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wrought so well, with labour and long paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they to life recovered her at last:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, sighing sore, as if her hart in twaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had riven bene and all her hart-strings brast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With drearie drouping eyne lookt up like one aghast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There she beheld, that sore her griev'd to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her father and her friends about her lying,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her selfe sole left a second spoyle to bee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of those, that, having saved her from dying,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Renew'd her death by timely death denying.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What now is left her but to wayle and weepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wringing her hands, and ruefully loud crying?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne cared she her wound in teares to steepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Albe with all their might those Brigants her did keepe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when they saw her now reliv'd againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They left her so, in charge of one, the best</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of many worst, who with unkind disdaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cruell rigour her did much molest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Scarse yeelding her due food or timely rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And scarsely suffring her infestred wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sore her payn'd, by any to be drest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So leave we her in wretched thraldome bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And turne we backe to Calidore where we him found.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who when he backe returned from the wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saw his shepheards cottage spoyled quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his love reft away, he wexed wood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And halfe enraged at that ruefull sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That even his hart, for very fell despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his owne flesh he readie was to teare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He chauft, he griev'd, he fretted, and he sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fared like a furious wyld Beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose whelpes are stolne away, she being otherwhere.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne wight he found to whom he might complaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne wight he found of whom he might inquire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That more increast the anguish of his paine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He sought the woods, but no man could see there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He sought the plaines, but could no tydings heare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The woods did nought but ecchoes vaine rebound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The playnes all waste and emptie did appeare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where wont the shepheards oft their pypes resound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And feed an hundred flocks, there now not one he found.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last, as there he romed up and downe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He chaunst one comming towards him to spy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seem'd to be some sorie simple clowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With ragged weedes, and lockes upstaring hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if he did from some late daunger fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet his feare did follow him behynd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who as he unto him approched nye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He mote perceive by signes which he did fynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Coridon it was, the silly shepherds hynd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho, to him running fast, he did not stay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To greet him first, but askt where were the rest?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where Pastorell? Who full of fresh dismay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gushing forth in teares, was so opprest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he no word could speake, but smit his brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And up to heaven his eyes fast-streming threw:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat the knight amaz'd yet did not rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But askt againe, what ment that rufull hew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where was his Pastorell? where all the other crew?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ah, well-away!" (sayd he, then sighing sore)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"That ever I did live this day to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This dismall day, and was not dead before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before I saw faire Pastorella dye."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Die? out alas!" then Calidore did cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"How could the death dare ever her to quell?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But read thou, shepheard, read what destiny</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or other dyrefull hap from heaven or hell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath wrought this wicked deed: doe feare away, and tell."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho, when the Shepheard breathed had a-while,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He thus began: "Where shall I then commence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This wofull tale? or how those Brigants vyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With cruell rage and dreadfull violence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spoyld all our cots, and caried us from hence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or how faire Pastorell should have bene sold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To marchants, but was sav'd with strong defence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or how those theeves, whilest one sought her to hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fell all at ods, and fought through fury fierce and bold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"In that same conflict (woe is me!) befell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This fatall chaunce, this dolefull accident,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose heavy tydings now I have to tell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First all the captives, which they here had hent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were by them slaine by generall consent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Old Meliboe and his good wife withall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These eyes saw die, and dearely did lament;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when the lot to Pastorell did fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their Captaine long withstood, and did her death forstall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But what could he gainst all them doe alone?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It could not boot: needs mote she die at last.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I onely scapt through great confusione</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of cryes and clamors which amongst them past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In dreadfull darknesse dreadfully aghast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That better were with them to have bene dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then here to see all desolate and wast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Despoyled of those joyes and jolly-head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which with those gentle shepherds here I wont to lead."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When Calidore these ruefull newes had raught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His hart quite deaded was with anguish great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all his wits with doole were nigh distraught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he his face, his head, his Brest did beat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And death it selfe unto himselfe did threat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oft cursing th' heavens, that so cruell were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To her, whose name he often did repeat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wishing oft that he were present there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When she was slaine, or had bene to her succour nere.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But after griefe awhile had had his course,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And spent it selfe in mourning, he at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began to mitigate his swelling sourse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his mind with better reason cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How he might save her life, if life did last;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or, if that dead, how he her death might wreake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith otherwise he could not mend thing past;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or if it to revenge he were too weake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then for to die with her, and his lives threed to breake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho Coridon he prayd, sith he well knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The readie way unto that theevish wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wend with him, and be his conduct trew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the place, to see what should be donne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he, whose hart through feare was late fordonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would not for ought be drawne to former drede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by all meanes the daunger knowne did shonne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet Calidore so well him wrought with meed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And faire bespoke with words, that he at last agreed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So forth they goe together (God before)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both clad in shepheards weeds agreeably,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both with shepheards hookes: But Calidore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had, underneath, him armed privily.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, to the place when they approched nye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They chaunst, upon an hill not farre away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some flockes of sheepe and shepheards to espy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom they both agreed to take their way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In hope there newes to learne, how they mote best assay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There did they find, that which they did not feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The selfe same flocks the which those theeves had reft</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From Melibce and from themselves whyleare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And certaine of the theeves there by them left,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which, for want of beards, themselves then kept.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right well knew Coridon his owne late sheepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seeing them for tender pittie wept;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when he saw the theeves which did them keepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His hart gan fayle, albe he saw them all a-sleepe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Calidore recomforting his griefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though not his feare, for nought may feare disswade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him hardly forward drew, whereas the thiefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lay sleeping soundly in the bushes shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom Coridon him counseld to invade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now all unwares, and take the spoyle away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he, that in his mind had closely made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A further purpose, would not so them slay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But gently waking them gave them the time of day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho, sitting downe by them upon the greene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of sundrie things he purpose gan to faine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he by them might certaine tydings weene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Pastorell, were she alive or slaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst which the theeves them questioned againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What mister men, and eke from whence they were:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom they aunswer'd, as did appertaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they were poore heardgroomes, the which whylere</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had from their maisters fled, and now sought hyre elswhere.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whereof right glad they seem'd, and offer made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hyre them well if they their flockes would keepe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For they themselves were evill groomes, they sayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unwont with heards to watch, or pasture sheepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to forray the land, or secure the deepe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereto they soone agreed, and earnest tooke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To keepe their flockes for litle hyre and chepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For they for better hyre did shortly looke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So there all day they bode, till light the sky forsooke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho, when as towards darksome night it drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto their hellish dens those theeves them brought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where shortly they in great acquaintance grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the secrets of their entrayles sought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There did they find, contrarie to their thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Pastorell yet liv'd; but all the rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were dead, right so as Coridon had taught:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof they both full glad and blyth did rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But chiefly Calidore, whom griefe had most possest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At length, when they occasion fittest found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In dead of night, when all the theeves did rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After a late forray, and slept full sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir Calidore him arm'd as he thought best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having of late by diligent inquest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Provided him a sword of meanest sort;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which he streight went to the Captaines nest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Coridon durst not with him consort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne durst abide behind, for dread of worse effort.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When to the Cave they came, they found it fast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Calidore with huge resistlesse might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dores assayled, and the locks upbrast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With noyse whereof the theefe awaking light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the entrance ran; where the bold knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Encountring him with small resistence slew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles faire Pastorell through great affright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was almost dead, misdoubting least of-new</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some uprore were like that which lately she did vew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when as Calidore was comen in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gan aloud for Pastorell to call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Knowing his voice, although not heard long sin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She sudden was revived therewithall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wondrous joy felt in her spirits thrall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like him that being long in tempest tost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Looking each houre into deathes mouth to fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At length espyes at hand the happie cost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On which he safety hopes that earst feard to be lost.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her gentle hart, that now long season past</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had never joyance felt nor chearefull thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began some smacke of comfort new to tast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like lyfull heat to nummed senses brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And life to feele that long for death had sought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne lesse in hart rejoyced Calidore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When he her found; but, like to one distraught</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And robd of reason, towards her him bore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thousand times embrast, and kist a thousand more.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But now by this, with noyse of late uprore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hue and cry was raysed all about;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the Brigants flocking in great store</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the cave gan preasse, nought having dout</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that was doen, and entred in a rout:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Calidore in th'entry close did stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And entertayning them with courage stout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still slew the formost that came first to hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So long till all the entry was with bodies mand.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho, when no more could nigh to him approch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He breath'd his sword, and rested him till day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when he spyde upon the earth t'encroch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through the dead carcases he made his way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst which he found a sword of better say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which he forth went into th'open light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where all the rest for him did readie stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, fierce assayling him, with all their might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gan all upon him lay: there gan a dreadfull fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>How many flyes, in whottest sommers day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do seize upon some beast whose flesh is bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the place with swarmes do overlay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with their litle stings right felly fare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So many theeves about him swarming are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which do him assayle on every side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sore oppresse, ne any him doth spare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he doth with his raging brond divide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their thickest troups, and round about him scattreth wide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like as a Lion mongst an heard of dere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disperseth them to catch his choysest pray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So did he fly amongst them here and there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all that nere him came did hew and slay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till he had strowd with bodies all the way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none his daunger daring to abide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fled from his wrath, and did themselves convay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into their caves, their heads from death to hide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne any left that viclorie to him envide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then, backe returning to his dearest deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He her gah to recomfort all he might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With gladfull speaches and with lovely cheare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And forth her bringing to the joyous light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof she long had lackt the wishfull sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deviz'd all goodly meanes from her to drive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sad remembrance of her wretched plight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So her uneath at last he did revive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That long had lyen dead, and made again alive.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This doen, into those theevish dens he went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thence did all the spoyles and threasures take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which they from many long had robd and rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But fortune now the victors meed did make:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which the best he did his love betake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And also all those flockes, which they before</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had reft from Melibce and from his make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He did them all to Coridon restore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So drove them all away, and his love with him bore.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-6-12" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Fayre Pastorella by great hap</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Her parents understands.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Calidore doth the Blatant Beast</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Subdew, and bind in bands.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Like as a ship, that through the Ocean wyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Directs her course unto one certaine cost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is met of many a counter winde and tyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which her winged speed is let and crost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And she her selfe in stormie surges tost;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, making many a horde and many a bay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still winneth way, ne hath her compasse lost:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right so it fares with me in this long way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose course is often stayd, yet never is astray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For all that hetherto hath long delayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This gentle knight from sewing his first quest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though out of course, yet hath not bene missayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To shew the courtesie by him profest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even unto the lowest and the least.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But now I come into my course againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To his atchievement of the Blatant Beast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who all this while at will did range and raine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whilst none was him to stop, nor none him to restraine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sir Calidore, when thus he now had raught</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Pastorella from those Brigants powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the Castle of Belgard her brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof was Lord the good Sir Bellamoure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who whylome was, in his youthes freshest flowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A lustie knight as ever wielded speare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And had endured many a dreadfull stoure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In bloudy battell for a Ladie deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fayrest Ladie then of all that living were:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her name was Claribell; whose father hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Lord of Many Hands, farre renound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For his great riches and his greater might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He, through the wealth wherein he did abound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This daughter thought in wedlocke to have bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the Prince of Picleland, bordering nere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she, whose sides before with secret wound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of love to Bellamoure empierced were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By all meanes shund to match with any forrein fere.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And Bellamour againe so well her pleased</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With dayly service and attendance dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of her love he was entyrely seized,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And closely did her wed, but knowne to few:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when her father understood, he grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In so great rage that them in dongeon deepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without compassion cruelly he threw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet did so streightly them asunder keepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That neither could to company of th'other creepe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nathlesse Sir Bellamour, whether through grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or secret guifts, so with his keepers wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to his love sometimes he came in place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof her wombe, unwist to wight, was fraught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in dew time a mayden child forth brought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which she streightway, (for dread least if her syre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should know thereof to slay he would have sought,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Delivered to her handmayd, that for hyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She should it cause be fostred under straunge attyre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The trustie damzell bearing it abrode</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the emptie fields, where living wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mote not bewray the secret of her lode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She forth gan lay unto the open light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The litle babe, to take thereof a sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom whylest she did with watrie eyne behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the litle brest, like christall bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She mote perceive a litle purple mold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That like a rose her silken leaves did faire unfold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Well she it markt, and pittied the more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet could not remedie her wretched case;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, closing it againe like as before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bedeaw'd with teares there left it in the place:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet left not quite, but drew a litle space</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behind the bushes, where she did her hyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet what mortall hand, or heavens grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would for the wretched infants helpe provyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which it loudly cald, and pittifully cryde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At length a Shepheard, which there by did keepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His fleecie flock upon the playnes around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Led with the infants cry that loud did weepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came to the place; where, when he wrapped found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th'abandond spoyle, he softly it unbound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, seeing there that did him pittie sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He tooke it up and in his mantle wound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So home unto his honest wife it bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who as her owne it nurst (and named) evermore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus long continu'd Claribell a thrall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Bellamour in bands; till that her syre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Departed life, and left unto them all:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then all the stormes of fortunes former yre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were turnd, and they to freedome did retyre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thenceforth they joy'd in happinesse together,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lived long in peace and love entyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without disquiet or dislike of ether,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till time that Calidore brought Pastorella thether.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Both whom they goodly well did entertaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Bellamour knew Calidore right well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And loved for his prowesse, sith they twaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long since had fought in field: Als Claribell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne lesse did tender the faire Pastorell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeing her weake and wan through durance long.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There they a while together thus did dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In much delight, and many joyes among,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Untill the Damzell gan to wex more sound and strong.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho gan Sir Calidore him to advize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his first quest, which he had long forlore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Asham'd to thinke how he that enterprize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which the Faery Queene had long afore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bequeath'd to him, forslacked had so sore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That much he feared least reprochfull blame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With foule dishonour him mote blot therefore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besides the losse of so much loos and fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As through the world thereby should glorifie his name.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therefore, resolving to returne in hast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto so great atchievement, he bethought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To leave his love, now perill being past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Claribell; whylest he that monster sought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throughout the world, and to destruction brought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So taking leave of his faire Pastorell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom to recomfort all the meanes he wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With thanks to Bellamour and Claribell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He went forth on his quest, and did that him befell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But first, ere I doe his adventures tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In this exploite, me needeth to declare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What did betide to the faire Pastorell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">During his absence, left in heavy care</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through daily mourning and nightly misfare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet did that auncient matrone all she might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To cherish her with all things choice and rare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her owne handmayd, that Melissa hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Appointed to attend her dewly day and night.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who in a morning, when this Maiden faire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was dighting her, having her snowy Brest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As yet not laced, nor her golden haire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into their comely tresses dewly drest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Chaunst to espy upon her yvory chest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rosie marke, which she remembred well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That litle Infant had, which forth she kest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The daughter of her Lady Claribell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which she bore the whiles in prison she did dwell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which well avizing, streight she gan to cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In her conceiptfull mynd that this faire Mayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was that same infant, which so long sith past</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She in the open fields had loosely layd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To fortunes spoile, unable it to ayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So, full of joy, streight forth she ran in hast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto her mistresse, being halfe dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tell her how the heavens had her graste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To save her chylde, which in misfortunes mouth was plaste.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The sober mother seeing such her mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet knowing not what meant that sodaine thro,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Askt her, how mote her words be understood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And what the matter was that mov'd her so?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"My liefe," (sayd she) "ye know that long ygo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilest ye in durance dwelt, ye to me gave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A little mayde, the which ye chylded tho;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The same againe if now ye list to have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The same is yonder Lady, whom high God did save."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Much was the Lady troubled at that speach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gan to question streight, how she it knew?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Most certaine markes" (sayd she) "do me it teach;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For on her brest I with these eyes did view</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The litle purple rose which thereon grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof her name ye then to her did give.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besides, her countenaunce and her likely hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Matched with equall years, do surely prieve</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That yond same is your daughter sure, which yet doth live."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The matrone stayd no lenger to enquire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But forth in hast ran to the straunger Mayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom catching greedily, for great desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rent up her brest, and bosome open layd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which that rose she plainely saw displayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, her embracing twixt her armes twaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She long so held, and softly weeping sayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"And livest thou, my daughter, now againe?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And art thou yet alive, whom dead I long did faine?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho further asking her of sundry things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And times comparing with their accidents,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She found at last, by very certaine signes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And speaking markes of passed monuments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That this young Mayd, whom chance to her presents,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is her owne daughter, her owne infant deare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, wondring long at those so straunge events,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A thousand times she her embraced nere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With many a joyfull kisse and many a melting teare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who ever is the mother of one chylde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which having thought long dead she fyndes alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let her by proofe of that which she hath fylde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In her owne breast, this mothers joy descrive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For other none such passion can contrive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In perfect forme, as this good Lady felt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When she so faire a daughter saw survive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Pastorella was, that nigh she swelt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For passing joy, which did all into pitty melt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thence running forth unto her loved Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She unto him recounted all that fell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, joyning joy with her in one accord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Acknowledg'd for his owne faire Pastorell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There leave we them in joy, and let us tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Calidore; who, seeking all this while</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That monstrous Beast by finall force to quell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through every place with restlesse paine and toile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him follow'd by the tract of his outragious spoile.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Through all estates he found that he had past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which he many massacres had left,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the Clergy now was come at last;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which such spoile, such havocke, and such theft</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He wrought, that thence all goodnesse he bereft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That endlesse were to tell. The Elfin Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who now no place besides unsought had left,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At length into a Monastere did light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where he him found despoyling all with maine and might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Into their cloysters now he broken had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through which the Monckes he chaced here and there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And them pursu'd into their dortours sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And searched all their eels and secrets neare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which what filth and ordure did appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were yrkesome to report; yet that foule Beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nought sparing them, the more did tosse and teare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ransacke all their dennes from most to least,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Regarding nought religion, nor their holy heast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>From thence into the sacred Church he broke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And robd the Chancell, and the deskes downe threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Altars fouled, and blasphemy spoke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And th' Images, for all their goodly hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did cast to ground, whilest none was them to rew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So all confounded and disordered there:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, seeing Calidore, away he flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Knowing his fatall hand by former feare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he him fast pursuing soone approched neare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Him in a narrow place he overtooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fierce assailing forst him turne againe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sternely he turnd againe, when he him strooke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his sharpe steele, and ran at him amaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With open mouth, that seemed to containe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A full good pecke within the utmost brim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All set with yron teeth in raunges twaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That terrifide his foes, and armed him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Appearing like the mouth of Orcus griesly grim:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And therein were a thousand tongs empight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of sundry kindes and sundry quality;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some were of dogs, that barked day and night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And some of cats, that wrawling still did cry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And some of Beares, that groynd continually;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And some of Tygres, that did seeme to gren</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And snar at all that ever passed by:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But most of them were tongues of mortall men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which spake reprochfully, not caring where nor when.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And them amongst were mingled here and there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The tongues of Serpents, with three forked stings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That spat out poyson, and gore-bloudy gere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At all that came within his ravenings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And spake licentious words and hatefull things</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of good and bad alike, of low and hie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne Kesars spared he a whit, nor Kings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But either blotted them with infamie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or bit them with his banefull teeth of injury.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Calidore, thereof no whit afrayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rencountred him with so impetuous might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That th'outrage of his violence he stayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bet abacke, threatning in vaine to bite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And spitting forth the poyson of his spight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That fomed all about his bloody jawes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, rearing up his former feete on hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He rampt upon him with his ravenous pawes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if he would have rent him with his cruell clawes</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But he, right well aware, his rage to ward</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did cast his shield atweene; and, therewithall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Putting his puissaunce forth, pursu'd so hard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That backeward he enforced him to fall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, being downe, ere he new helpe could call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His shield he on him threw, and fast downe held:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as a bullocke, that in bloudy stall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of butchers balefull hand to ground is feld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is forcibly kept downe, till he be throughly queld.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Full cruelly the Beast did rage and rore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be downe held, and maystred so with might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he gan fret and fome out bloudy gore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Striving in vaine to rere him selfe upright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For still, the more he strove, the more the Knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did him suppresse, and forcibly subdew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That made him almost mad for fell despight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He grind, he bit, he scratcht, he venim threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fared like a feend right horrible in hew:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Or like the hell-borne Hydra, which they faine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That great Alcides whilome overthrew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After that he had labourd long in vaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To crop his thousand heads, the which still new</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth budded, and in greater number grew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such was the fury of this hellish Beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilest Calidore him under him downe threw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who nathemore his heavy load releast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But aye, the more he rag'd, the more his powre increast.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="mutability" epub:type="part z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Mutability</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="subtitle">Legend of Constancy</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="mutability-canto-6" epub:type="prologue">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Proud Change (not pleasd, in mortall things</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Beneath the Moone to raigne)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pretends, as well of Gods, as Men,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To be the Soveraine.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>What man that sees the ever-whirling wheele,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Change, the which all mortall things doth sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that therby doth find, and plainly feele,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How <b>Mutability</b> in them doth play</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her cruell sports to many mens decay?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which that to all may better yet appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I will rehearse that whylome I heard say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How she at first her selfe began to reare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gainst all the Gods, and th'empire sought from them to beare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But first, here falleth fittest to unfold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her antique race and linage ancient,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As I have found it registred of old</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Faery Land mongst records permanent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She was, to weet, a daughter by descent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of those old Titans that did whylome strive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Saturnes sonne for heavens regiment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom though high Jove of kingdome did deprive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet many of their stemme long after did survive:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And many of them afterwards obtained</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great power of Jove, and high authority:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Hecate, in whose almighty hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He plac't all rule and principalitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be by her disposed diversly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Gods and men, as she them list divide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And drad Bellona, that doth sound on hie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Warres and allarums unto Nations wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That makes both heaven and earth to tremble at her pride.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So likewise did this Titanesse aspire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rule and dominion to her selfe to gaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That as a Goddesse men might her admire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heavenly honors yield, as to them twaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And first, on earth she sought it to obtaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where shee such proofe and sad examples shewed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her great power, to many ones great paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That not men onely (whom she soone subdewed)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But eke all other creatures her bad dooings rewed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For she the face of earthly things so changed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all which Nature had establisht first</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In good estate, and in meet order ranged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She did pervert, and all their statutes burst:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the worlds faire frame (which none yet durst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Gods or men to alter or misguide)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She alter'd quite; and made them all accurst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That God had blest, and did at first provide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In that still happy state for ever to abide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne shee the lawes of Nature onely brake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But eke of Justice, and of Policie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wrong of right, and bad of good did make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And death for life exchanged foolishlie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since which all living wights have learn'd to die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all this world is woxen daily worse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O pittious worke of <b>Mutability</b>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which we all are subject to that curse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And death, instead of life, have sucked from our Nurse!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now, when all the earth she thus had brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To her behest, and thralled to her might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She gan to cast in her ambitious thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T'attempt the empire of the heavens hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Jove himselfe to shoulder from his right.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And first, she past the region of the ayre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of the fire, whose substance thin and slight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made no resistance, ne could her contraire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ready passage to her pleasure did prepaire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thence to the Circle of the Moone she clambe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where Cynthia raignes in everlasting glory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whose bright shining palace straight she came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All fairely deckt with heavens goodly storie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose silver gates (by which there sate an hory</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Old aged Sire, with hower-glasse in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hight Time,) she entred, were he liefe or sory;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne staide till she the highest stage had scand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where Cynthia did sit, that never still did stand.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her sitting on an Ivory throne shee found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drawne of two steeds, th'one black, the other white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Environd with tenne thousand starres around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That duly her attended day and night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by her side there ran her Page, that hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vesper, whom we the Evening-starre intend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with his Torche, still twinkling like twylight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her lightened all the way where she should wend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And joy to weary wandring travailers did lend:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That when the hardy Titanesse beheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The goodly building of her Palace bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made of the heavens substance, and up-held</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With thousand Crystall pillors of huge hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She gan to burne in her ambitious spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And t'envie her that in such glory raigned.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones she cast by force and tortious might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her to displace, and to her selfe to have gained</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The kingdome of the Night, and waters by her wained.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Boldly she bid the Goddesse downe descend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And let her selfe into that Ivory throne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she her selfe more worthy thereof wend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And better able it to guide alone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether to men, whose fall she did bemone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or unto Gods, whose state she did maligne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or to th'infernall Powers her need give lone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her faire light and bounty most benigne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her selfe of all that rule she deemed most condigne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But she, that had to her that soveraigne seat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By highest Jove assign'd, therein to beare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nights burning lamp, regarded not her threat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne yielded ought for favour or for feare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with sterne count'naunce and disdainfull cheare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bending her horned browes, did put her back;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, boldly blaming her for comming there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bade her attonce from heavens coast to pack,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or at her perill bide the wrathfull Thunders wrack.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet nathemore the Giantesse forbare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But boldly preacing-on raught forth her hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To pluck her downe perforce from off her chaire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, there-with lifting up her golden wand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Threatned to strike her if she did with-stand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where-at the starres, which round about her blazed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the Moones bright wagon still did stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All beeing with so bold attempt amazed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on her uncouth habit and sterne looke still gazed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Mean-while the lower World, which nothing knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all that chaunced heere, was darkned quite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the heavens, and all the heavenly crew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of happy wights, now unpurvaid of light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were much afraid, and wondred at that sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fearing least Chaos broken had his chaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And brought againe on them eternall night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But chiefely Mercury, that next doth raigne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ran forth in haste unto the king of Gods to plaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All ran together with a great out-cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Joves faire palace fixt in heavens hight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, beating at his gates full earnestly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan call to him aloud with all their might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To know what meant that suddaine lacke of light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The father of the Gods, when this he heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was troubled much at their so strange affright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doubting least Typhon were againe uprear'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or other his old foes that once him sorely fear'd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones the sonne of Maia forth he sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Downe to the Circle of the Moone, to knowe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cause of this so strange astonishment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And why she did her wonted course forslowe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if that any were on earth belowe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That did with charmes or Magick her molest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him to attache, and downe to hell to throwe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if from heaven it were, then to arrest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Author, and him bring before his presence prest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The wingd-foot God so fast his plumes did beat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That soone he came where-as the Titanesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was striving with faire Cynthia for her seat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At whose strange sight and haughty hardinesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He wondred much, and feared her no lesse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet laying feare aside to doe his charge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last he bade her (with bold stedfastnesse)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ceasse to molest the Moone to walke at large,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or come before high Jove her dooings to discharge.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And there-with-all he on her shoulder laid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His snaky-wreathed Mace, whose awfull power</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth make both Gods and hellish fiends affraid:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where-at the Titanesse did sternly lower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stoutly answer'd, that in evill hower</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He from his Jove such message to her brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bid her leave faire Cynthia's silver bower;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith shee his Jove and him esteemed nought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more then Cynthia's selfe; but all their kingdoms sought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Heavens Herald staid not to reply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But past away, his doings to relate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto his Lord; who now, in th' highest sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was placed in his principall Estate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all the Gods about him congregate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom when Hermes had his message told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It did them all exceedingly amate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save Jove; who, changing nought his count'nance bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did unto them at length these speeches wise unfold;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Harken to mee awhile, yee heavenly Powers!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye may remember since th' Earths cursed seed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sought to assaile the heavens eternall towers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to us all exceeding feare did breed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, how we then defeated all their deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yee all do knowe, and them destroyed quite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet not so quite, but that there did succeed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An off-spring of their bloud, which did alite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the fruitfull earth, which doth us yet despite.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Of that bad seed is this bold woman bred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That now with bold presumption doth aspire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To thrust faire Phoebe from her silver bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke our selves from heavens high Empire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If that her might were match to her desire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherefore it now behoves us to advise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What way is best to drive her to retire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether by open force, or counsell wise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Areed, ye sonnes of God, as best as ye can devise."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So having said, he ceast; and with his brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(His black eye-brow, whose doomefull dreaded beck</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is wont to wield the world unto his vow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And even the highest Powers of heaven to check)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made signe to them in their degrees to speake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who straight gan cast their counsell grave and wise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mean-while th' Earths daughter, thogh she nought did reck</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Hermes message, yet gan now advise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What course were best to take in this hot bold emprize.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones she thus resolv'd; that whil'st the Gods</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(After returne of Hermes Embassie)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were troubled, and amongst themselves at ods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before they could new counsels re-allie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To set upon them in that extasie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And take what fortune, time, and place would lend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So forth she rose, and through the purest sky</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Joves high Palace straight cast to ascend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To prosecute her plot. Good on-set boads good end.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Shee there arriving boldly in did pass;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where all the Gods she found in counsell close.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All quite unarm'd, as then their manner was.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At sight of her they suddaine all arose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In great amaze, ne wist what way to chose:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Jove, all fearlesse, forc't them to aby;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his soveraine throne gan straight dispose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himselfe, more full of grace and Majestic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That mote encheare his friends, and foes mote terrific.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That when the haughty Titanesse beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All were she fraught with pride and impudence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet with the sight thereof was almost queld;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, inly quaking, seem'd as reft of sense</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And voyd of speech in that drad audience,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until that Jove himselfe her selfe bespake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Speake, thou fraile woman, speake with confidence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence art thou, and what doost thou here now make?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What idle errand hast thou earths mansion to forsake?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She, halfe confused with his great commaund,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet gathering spirit of her natures pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him boldly answer'd thus to his demaund:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"I am a daughter, by the mothers side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her that is Grand-mother magnifide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the Gods, great Earth, great Chaos child;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by the fathers, (be it not envide)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I greater am in bloud (whereon I build)'</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then all the Gods, though wrongfully from heaven exil'd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"For Titan (as ye all acknowledge must)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was Saturnes elder brother by birth-right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both sonnes of Uranus; but by unjust</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And guilefull meanes, through Corybantes slight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The younger thrust the elder from his right:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since which thou, Jove, injuriously hast held</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Heavens rule from Titans sonnes by might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And them to hellish dungeons downe hast feld.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Witnesse, ye Heavens, the truth of all that I have teld!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whil'st she thus spake, the Gods, that gave good eare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To her bold words, and marked well her grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Beeing of stature tall as any there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the Gods, and beautifull of face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As any of the Goddesses in place,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stood all astonied; like a sort of steeres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst whom some beast of strange and forraine race</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unwares is chaunc't, far straying from his peeres:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So did their ghastly gaze bewray their hidden feares.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Till, having pauz'd awhile, Jove thus bespake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Will never mortall thoughts ceasse to aspire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In this bold sort to Heaven claime to make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And touch celestiall seats with earthly mire?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I would have thought that bold Procrustes hire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or Typhons fall, or proud Ixions paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or great Prometheus tasting of our ire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would have suffiz'd the rest for to restraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And warn'd all men by their example to refraine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But now this off-scum of that cursed fry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dare to renew the like bold enterprize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chalenge th' heritage of this our skie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom what should hinder, but that we likewise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should handle as the rest of her allies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thunder-drive to hell?" With that, he shooke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His Neclar-deawed locks, with which the skyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the world beneath for terror quooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eft his burning levin-brond in hand he tooke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when he looked on her lovely face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which faire beames of beauty did appeare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That could the greatest wrath soone turne to grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Such sway doth beauty even in Heaven beare)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He staid his hand; and, having chang'd his cheare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He thus againe in milder wise began:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"But ah! if Gods should strive with flesh yfere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then shortly should the progeny of man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be rooted out, if Jove should do still what he can.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But thee, faire Titans child, I rather weene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through some vaine errour, or inducement light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see that mortall eyes have never scene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or through ensample of thy sisters might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bellona, whose great glory thou doost spight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since thou hast scene her dreadfull power belowe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst wretched men (dismaide with her affright)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bandie Crownes, and Kingdoms to bestowe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sure thy worth no lesse then hers doth seem to showe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But wote thou this, thou hardy Titanesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That not the worth of any living wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May challenge ought in Heavens interesse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much lesse the Title of old Titans Right:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For we by conquest, of our soveraine might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by eternal doome of Fates decree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have wonne the Empire of the Heavens bright;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to our selves we hold, and to whom wee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall worthy deeme partakers of our blisse to bee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Then ceasse thy idle claime, thou foolish gerle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seeke by grace and goodnesse to obtaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That place, from which by folly Titan fell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There to thou maist perhaps, if so thou faine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have Jove thy gracious Lord and Soveraine."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So having said, she thus to him replide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Ceasse, Saturnes sonne, to seeke by proffers vaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of idle hopes t'allure me to thy side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For to betray my Right before I have it tride.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But thee, O Jove! no equall Judge I deeme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of my desert, or of my dewfull Right;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in thine owne behalfe maist partiall seeme:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to the highest him, that is behight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Father of Gods and men by equall might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet, the God of Nature, I appeale."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There-at Jove wexed wroth, and in his spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did inly grudge, yet did it well conceale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bade Dan Phoebus scribe her Appellation scale.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones the time and place appointed were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where all, both heavenly Powers and earthly wights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before great Natures presence should appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For triall of their Titles and best Rights:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was, to weet, upon the highest hights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Arlo-hill (Who knowes not Arlo-hill?)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is the highest head (in all mens sights)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of my old father <b>Mole</b>, whom Shepheards quill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Renowmed hath with hymnes fit for a rurall skill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, were it not ill fitting for this file</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sing of hilles and woods mongst warres and Knights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I would abate the sternenesse of my stile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst these sterne stounds to mingle soft delights;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tell how Arlo, through Dianaes spights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Beeing of old the best and fairest Hill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was in all this holy Islands hights)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was made the most unpleasant and most ill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meane-while, O Clio! lend Calliope thy quill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whylome when <b>Ireland</b> florished in fame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of wealths and goodnesse, far above the rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all that beare the British Islands name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gods then us'd (for pleasure and for rest)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oft to resort there-to, when seem'd them best;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But none of all there-in more pleasure found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Cynthia, that is soveraine Queene profest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of woods and forrests which therein abound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sprinkled with wholsom waters more then most on ground</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But mongst them all, as fittest for her game,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eyther for chace of beasts with hound or boawe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or for to shrowde in shade from Phoebus flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or bathe in fountaines that do freshly flowe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or from high hilles or from the dales belowe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She chose this Arlo; where she did resort</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all her Nymphes enranged on a rowe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With whom the woody Gods did oft consort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For with the Nymphes the Satyres love to play and sport.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Amongst the which there was a Nymph that hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Molanna; daughter of old Father Mole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sister unto Mulla faire and bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto whose bed false Bregog whylome stole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Shepheard Colin dearely did condole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made her lucklesse loves well knowne to be:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But this Molanna, were she not so shole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were no lesse faire and beautifull then shee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, as she is, a fayrer flood may no man see.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For, first, she springs out of two marble Rocks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which a grove of Oakes high-mounted growes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That as a girlond seemes to deck the locks</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of som faire Bride, brought forth with pompous showes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of her bowre, that many flowers strowes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So through the flowry Dales she tumbling downe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through many woods and shady coverts flowes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(That on each side her silver channell crowne)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till to the Plaine she come, whose Valleyes she doth drowne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In her sweet streames Diana used oft</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(After her sweaty chace and toylesome play)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bathe her selfe; and, after, on the soft</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And downy grasse her dainty limbes to lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In covert shade, where none behold her may;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For much she hated sight of living eye.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Foolish god Faunus, though full many a day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He saw her clad, yet longed foolishly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see her naked mongst her Nymphes in privity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>No way he found to compasse his desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to corrupt Molanna, this her maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her to discover for some secret hire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So her with flattering words he first assaid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after, pleasing gifts for her purvaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Queen e-apples, and red Cherries from the tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which he her allured, and betrayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tell what time he might her Lady see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When she her selfe did bathe, that he might secret bee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There-to he promist, if shee would him pleasure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With this small boone, to quit her with a better;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet, that where-as shee had out of measure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long lov'd the Fanchin, who by nought did set her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he would undertake for this to get her</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be his Love, and of him liked well:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besides all which, he vow'd to be her debter</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For many moe good turnes then he would tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The least of which this little pleasure should excell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The simple mayd did yield to him anone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eft him placed where he close might view</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That never any saw, save onely one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, for his hire to so foole-hardy dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was of his hounds devour'd in Hunters hew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, as her manner was on sunny day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Diana, with her Nymphes about her, drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To this sweet spring; where, doffing her array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She bath'd her lovely limbes, for Jove a likely pray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There Faunus saw that pleased much his eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made his hart to tickle in his brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, for great joy of some-what he did spy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He could him not containe in silent rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, breaking forth in laughter, loud profest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His foolish thought: A foolish Faune indeed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That couldst not hold thy selfe so hidden blest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wouldest needs thine owne conceit areed!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Babblers unworthy been of so divine a meed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Goddesse, all abashed with that noise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In haste forth started from the guilty brooke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, running straight where-as she heard his voice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enclos'd the bush about, and there him tooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like darred Larke, not daring up to looke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On her whose sight before so much he sought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence forth they drew him by the homes, and shooke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nigh all to peeces, that they left him nought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then into the open light they forth him brought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like as an huswife, that with busie care</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thinks of her Dairy to make wondrous gaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Finding where-as some wicked beast unware</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That breakes into her Dayr' house, there doth draine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her creaming pannes, and frustrate all her paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath, in some snare or gin set close behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Entrapped him, and caught into her traine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then thinkes what punishment were best assign'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thousand deathes deviseth in her vengefull mind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So did Diana and her maydens all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Use silly Faunus, now within their baile:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They mocke and scorne him, and him foule miscall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some by the nose him pluckt, some by the taile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by his goatish beard some did him haile:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet he (poore soule!) with patience all did beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For nought against their wils might countervaile:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought he said, what ever he did heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, hanging downe his head, did like a Mome appeare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At length, when they had flouted him their fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They gan to cast what penaunce him to give.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some would have gelt him; but that same would spill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Wood-gods breed, which must for ever live:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Others would through the river him have drive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ducked deepe; but that seem'd penaunce light:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But most agreed, and did this sentence give,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him in Deares skin to clad; and in that plight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hunt him with their hounds, him selfe save how hee might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Cynthia's selfe, more angry then the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thought not enough to punish him in sport,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of her shame to make a gamesome jest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But gan examine him in straighter sort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which of her Nymphes, or other close consort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him thither brought, and her to him betraid?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He, much affeard, to her confessed short</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That 'twas Molanna which her so bewraid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then all attonce their hands upon Molanna laid.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But him (according as they had decreed)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a Deeres-skin they covered, and then chast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all their hounds that after him did speed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he, more speedy, from them fled more fast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then any Deere, so sore him dread aghast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They after followed all with shrill out-cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shouting as they the heavens would have brast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the woods and dales, where he did flie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did ring againe, and loud re-eccho to the skie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So they him followed till they weary were;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When, back returning to Molann' againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They, by commaund'ment of Diana, there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her whelm'd with stones. Yet Faunus (for her paine)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her beloved Fanchin did obtaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her he would receive unto his bed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So now her waves passe through a pleasant Plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till with the Fanchin she her selfe do wed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And (both combined) themselves in one faire river spred.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nath'lesse Diana, full of indignation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence-forth abandond her delicious brooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In whose sweet streame, before that bad occasion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So much delight to bathe her limbes she tooke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne onely her, but also quite forsooke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All those faire forrests about Arlo hid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all that Mountaine, which doth over-looke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The richest champain that may else be rid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the faire Shure, in which are thousand Salmons bred.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Them all, and all that she so deare did way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence-forth she left; and, parting from the place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There-on an heavy haplesse curse did lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet, that Wolves, where she was wont to space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should harbour'd be and all those Woods deface,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Thieves should rob and spoile that Coast around:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since which, those Woods, and all that goodly Chase</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth to this day with Wolves and Thieves abound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which too-too true that lands in-dwellers since have found.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="mutability-canto-7" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Pealing, from Iove, to Natures Bar,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Bold Alteration pleades</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Large Evidence: but Nature soone</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Her righteous Doom areads.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Ah! whither doost thou now, thou greater Muse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me from these woods and pleasing forrests bring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And my fraile spirit, (that dooth oft refuse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This too high flight, unfit for her weake wing)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lift up aloft, to tell of heavens King</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Thy soveraine Sire) his fortunate successe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And victory in bigger notes to sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he obtain'd against that Titanesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That him of heavens Empire sought to dispossesse?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet, sith I needs must follow thy behest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do thou my weaker wit with skill inspire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fit for this turne; and in my feeble brest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kindle fresh sparks of that immortall fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which learned minds inflameth with desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of heavenly things: for who, but thou alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That art yborne of heaven and heavenly Sire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can tell things doen in heaven so long ygone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So farre past memory of man that may be knowne?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now, at the time that was before agreed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th ds ass e m bled all on Arlo Hill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As well those that are sprung of heavenly seed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As those that all the other world do fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rule both sea and land unto their will:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Onely th'infernall Powers might not appearc;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As well for horror of their count'naunce ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As for th'unruly fiends which they did feare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet Pluto and Proserpina were present there.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And thither also came all other creatures,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What-ever life or motion do retaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">According to their sundry kinds of features,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Arlo scarsly could them all containe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So full they filled every hill and Plaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And had not Natures Sergeant (that is Order)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them well disposed by his busie paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And raunged farre abroad in every border,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They would have caused much confusion and disorder.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then forth issewed (great goddesse) great dame Nature</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With goodly port and gracious Majesty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being far greater and more tall of stature</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then any of the gods or Powers on hie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet certes by her face and physnomy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether she man or woman inly were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That could not any creature well descry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For with a veile, that wimpled every where,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her head and face was hid that mote to none appearc.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That, some do say, was so by skill devized,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hide the terror of her uncouth hew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From mortall eyes that should be sore agrized;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that her face did like a Lion shew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That eye of wight could not indure to view:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But others tell that it so beautious was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And round about such beames of splendor threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it the Sunne a thousand times did pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne could be scene but like an image in a glass.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That well may seemen true; for well I weene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That this same day when she on Arlo sat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her garment was so bright and wondrous sheene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That my fraile wit cannot devize to what</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It to compare, nor finde like stuffe to that:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As those three sacred Saints, though else most wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet on mount Thabor quite their wits forgat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When they their glorious Lord in strange disguise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Transfigur'd sawe; his garments so did daze their eyes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In a fayre Plaine upon an equall Hill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She placed was in a pavilion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not such as Craftes-men by their idle skill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are wont for Princes states to fashion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But th' Earth herselfe, of her owne motion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of her fruitfull bosome made to growe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most dainty trees, that, shooting up anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did seeme to bow their bloosming heads full lowe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For homage unto her, and like a throne did showe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So hard it is for any living wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All her array and vestiments to tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That old Dan Geffrey (in whose gentle spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The pure well head of Poesie did dwell)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his <i>Foules parley</i> durst not with it mel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But it transferd to Alane, who he thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had in his <i>Plaint of kinde</i> describ'd it well:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which who will read set forth so as it ought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go seek he out that Alane where he may be sought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And all the earth far underneath her feete</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was dight with flowers that voluntary grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the ground, and sent forth odours sweet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tenne thousand mores of sundry sent and hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That might delight the smell, or please the view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which the Nymphes from all the brooks thereby</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had gathered, they at her foot-stoole threw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That richer seem'd then any tapestry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Princes bowres adorne with painted imagery.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And Mole himselfe, to honour her the more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did deck himselfe in freshest faire attire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his high head, that seemeth alwayes hore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hardned frosts of former winters ire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He with an Oaken girlond now did tire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if the love of some new Nymph, late scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had in him kindled youthfull fresh desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made him change his gray attire to greene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, gentle Mole! such joyance hath thee well beseene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Was never so great joyance since the day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the gods whylome assembled were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On Haemus hill in their divine array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To celebrate the solemne bridall cheare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Twixt Peleus and Dame Thetis pointed there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where Phoebus selfe, that god of Poets hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They say, did sing the spousall hymne full cleere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the gods were ravisht with delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his celestiall song, and Musicks wondrous might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This great Grandmother of all creatures bred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great Nature, ever young, yet full of eld;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still mooving, yet unmoved from her sted;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unseene of any, yet of all beheld;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus sitting in her throne, as I have teld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before her came dame Mutability;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, being lowe before her presence feld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With meek obaysance and humilitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus gan her plaintif Plea with words to amplifie:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"To thee, O greatest Goddesse, onely great!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An humble suppliant loe! I lowely fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeking for Right, which I of thee entreat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who Right to all dost deale indifferently,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Damning all Wrong and tortious Injurie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which any of thy creatures do to other</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Oppressing them with power unequally,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith of them all thou art the equall mother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And knittest each to each, as brother unto brother.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"To thee therefore of this same Jove I plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of his fellow gods that faine to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That challenge to themselves the whole worlds raign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which the greatest part is due to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heaven it selfe by heritage in Fee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For heaven and earth I both alike do deeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith heaven and earth are both alike to thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gods no more then men thou doest esteeme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For even the gods to thee, as men to gods, do seeme.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Then weigh, O soveraigne goddesse! by what right</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These gods do claime the worlds whole soverainty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that is onely dew unto thy might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arrogate to themselves ambitiously:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As for the gods owne principality,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Jove usurpes unjustly, that to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My heritage Jove's selfe cannot denie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From my great Grandsire Titan unto mee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deriv'd by dew descent; as is well knowen to thee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Yet mauger Jove, and all his gods beside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I do possesse the worlds most regiment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if ye please it into parts divide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every parts inholders to convent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall to your eyes appeare incontinent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, first, the Earth (great mother of us all)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That only seemes unmov'd and permanent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto Mutabilitie not thrall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet is she chang'd in part, and eeke in generall:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For all that from her springs, and is ybredde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How-ever faire it flourish for a time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet see we soone decay; and, being dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To turne againe unto their earthly slime:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, out of their decay and mortall crime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We daily see new creatures to arize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of their Winter spring another Prime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unlike in forme, and chang'd by strange disguise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So turne they still about, and change in restlesse wise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"As for her tenants, that is, man and beasts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The beasts we daily see massacred dy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As thralls and vassals unto mens beheasts;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And men themselves do change continually,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From youth to eld, from wealth to poverty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From good to bad, from bad to worst of all:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne doe their bodies only flit and fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But eeke their minds (which they immortall call)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still change and vary thoughts, as new occasions fall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Ne is the water in more constant case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether those same on high, or these belowe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For th'Ocean moveth still from place to place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every River still doth ebbe and flowe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne any Lake, that seems most still and slowe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne Poole so small, that can his smoothnesse holde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When any winde doth under heaven blowe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which the clouds are also tost and roll'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now like great Hills, and streight like sluces them unfold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"So likewise are all watry living wights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still tost and turned with continuall change,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Never abiding in their stedfast plights:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fish, still floting, doe at random range,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And never rest, but evermore exchange</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their dwelling places, as the streames them carrie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne have the watry foules a certaine grange</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein to rest, ne in one stead do tarry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But flitting still doe flie, and still their places vary.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Next is the Ayre; which who feeles not by sense</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(For of all sense it is the middle meane)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To flit still, and with subtill influence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his thin spirit all creatures to maintaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In state of life? O weake life! that does leane</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On thing so tickle as th'unsteady ayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which every howre is chang'd and altred cleane</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With every blast that bloweth, fowle or faire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The faire doth it prolong; the fowle doth it impaire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Therein the changes infinite beholde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to her creatures every minute chaunce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now boyling hot, streight friezing deadly cold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now faire sun-shine, that makes all skip and dauncc;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Streight bitter stormes, and balefull countenance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That makes them all to shiver and to shake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rayne, haile, and snowe do pay them sad penance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dreadfull thunder-claps (that make them quake)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With flames and flashing lights that thousand changes make.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Last is the fire; which, though it live for ever,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne can be quenched quite, yet every day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We see his parts, so soone as they do sever,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To lose their heat and shortly to decay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So makes himself his owne consuming pray:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne any living creatures doth he breed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all that are of others bredd doth slay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with their death his cruell life dooth feed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nought leaving but their barren ashes without seede.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Thus all these fower (the which the groundwork bee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the world and of all living wights)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To thousand sorts of Change we subject see:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet are they chang'd (by other wondrous slights)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into themselves, and lose their native mights;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Fire to Ayre, and th'Ayre to Water sheere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Water into Earth; yet Water fights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Fire, and Ayre with Earth, approaching neere:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet all are in one body, and as one appeare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"So in them all raignes Mutabilitie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How-ever these, that Gods themselves do call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of them do claime the rule and soverainty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Vesta, of the fire asthereall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vulcan, of this with us so usuall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ops, of the earth; and Juno, of the ayre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Neptune, of seas; and Nymphes, of Rivers all:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all those Rivers to me subject are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the rest, which they usurp, be all my share.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Which to approven true, as I have told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vouchsafe, O Goddesse! to thy presence call</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rest which doe the world in being hold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As times and seasons of the yeare that fall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the which demand in generall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or judge thyselfe, by verdit of thine eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether to me they are not subject all."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nature did yeeld thereto; and by-and-by</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bade Order call them all before her Majesty.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So forth issew'd the Seasons of the yeare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First, lusty Spring, all dight in leaves of flowres</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That freshly budded and new bloosmes did beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(In which a thousand birds had built their bowres</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sweetly sung to call forth Paramours)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his hand a javelin he did beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on his head (as fit for warlike stoures)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A guilt engraven morion he did weare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That as some did him love, so others did him feare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then came the jolly Sommer, being dight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In a thin silken cassock coloured greene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was unlyned all, to be more light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on his head a girlond well beseene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He wore, from which, as he had chauffed been,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sweat did drop; and in his hand he bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A boawe and shaftes, as he in forrest greene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had hunted late the Libbard or the Bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now would bathe his limbes with labor heated sore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then came the Autumne all in yellow clad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As though he joyed in his plentious store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Laden with fruits that made him laugh, full glad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he had banish t hunger, which to-fore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had by the belly oft him pinched sore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his head a wreath, that was enrold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With ears of corne of every sort, he bore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his hand a sickle he did holde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To reape the ripened fruits the which the earth had yold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lastly, came Winter cloathed all in frize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Chattering his teeth for cold that did him chill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whil'st on his hoary beard his breath did frecse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the dull drops, that from his purpled bill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As from a limbeck did adown distill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his right hand a tipped staffe he held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which his feeble steps he stayed still;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he was faint with cold, and weak with eld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That scarse his loosed limbes he hable was to weld.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>These, marching softly, thus in order went;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after them the Monthes all riding came.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First, sturdy March, with brows full sternly bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And armed strongly, rode upon a Ram,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The same which over Hellespontus swam;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet in his hand a spade he also hent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in a bag all sorts of seeds ysame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which on the earth he strowed as he went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fild her wombe with fruitfull hope of nourishment.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Next came fresh Aprill, full of lustyhed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wanton as a Kid whose home new buds:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a Bull he rode, the same which led</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Europa floting through th' Argolick fluds:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His homes were gilden all with golden studs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And garnished with garlonds goodly dight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the fairest flowres and freshest buds</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which th'earth brings forth; and wet he seem'd in sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With waves, through which he waded for his loves delight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then came faire May, the fayrest mayd on ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deckt all with dainties of her seasons pryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And throwing flowres out of her lap around:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon two brethrens shoulders she did ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The twinnes of Leda; which on eyther side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Supported her like to their soveraigne Queene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lord! how all creatures laught when her they spide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And leapt and daunc't as they had ravisht beene!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Cupid selfe about her fluttred all in greene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And after her came jolly June, arrayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All in greene leaves, as he a Player were;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet in his time he wrought as well as playd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That by his plough-yrons mote right well appeare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a Crab he rode, that him did beare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With crooked crawling steps an uncouth pase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And backward yode, as Bargemen wont to fare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bending their force contrary to their face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like that ungracious crew which faines demurest grace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then came hot July boyling like to fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all his garments he had cast away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a Lyon raging yet with ire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He boldly rode, and made him to obay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It was the beast that whylome did forray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Nemaean forrest, till th'Amphytrionide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him slew, and with his hide did him array.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behinde his back a sithe, and by his side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under his belt he bore a sickle circling wide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The sixt was August, being rich arrayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In garment all of gold downe to the ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet rode he not, but led a lovely Mayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth by the lilly hand, the which was cround</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With cares of corne, and full her hand was found:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was the righteous Virgin, which of old</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Liv'd here on earth, and plenty made abound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But after Wrong was lov'd, and Justice solde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She left th'unrighteous world, and was to heaven extold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Next him September marched, eeke on foote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was he heavy laden with the spoyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of harvests riches, which he made his boot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him enricht with bounty of the soyle:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his one hand, as fit for harvests toyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He held a knife-hook; and in th'other hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A paire of waights, with which he did assoyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both more and lesse, where it in doubt did stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And equall gave to each as Justice duly scann'd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then came October full of merry glee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For yet his noule was totty of the must,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he was treading in the wine-fats see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of the joyous oyle, whose gentle gust</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made him so frollick and so full of lust:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a dreadfull Scorpion he did ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The same which by Dianaes doom unjust</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Slew great Orion; and eeke by his side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had his ploughing-share and coulter ready tyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Next was November; he full grosse and fat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As fed with lard, and that right well might seeme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he had been a fatting hogs of late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That yet his browes with sweat did reek and steem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet the season was full sharp and breem:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In planting eeke he took no small delight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereon he rode not easie was to deeme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For it a dreadfull Centaure was in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The seed of Saturne and faire Nais, Chiron hight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And after him came next the chill December:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet he, through merry feasting which he made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And great bonfires, did not the cold remember;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His Saviour's birth his mind so much did glad.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a shaggy-bearded Goat he rode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The same wherewith Dan Jove in tender yeares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They say, was nourisht by th'Idaean mayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his hand a broad deepe boawle he beares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which he freely drinks an health to all his peeres.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then came old January, wrapped well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In many weeds to keep the cold away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet did he quake and quiver, like to quell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And blowe his nayles to warme them if he may;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For they were numbd with holding all the day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An hatchet keene, with which he felled wood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from the trees did lop the needlesse spray:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon an huge great Earth-pot steane he stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From whose wide mouth there flowed forth the Romane Flood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And lastly came cold February, sitting</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In an old wagon, for he could not ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drawne of two fishes, for the season fitting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which through the flood before did softly slyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And swim away: yet had he by his side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His plough and harnesse fit to till the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tooles to prune the trees, before the pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of hasting Prime did make them burgein round.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So past the twelve Months forth, and their dew places found.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And after these there came the Day and Night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Riding together both with equall pase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th'one on a Palfrey blacke, the other white;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Night had covered her uncomely face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a blacke veile, and held in hand a mace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On top whereof the moon and stars were pight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sleep and darknesse round about did trace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Day did beare upon his scepters hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The goodly Sun encompast all with beames bright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then came the Howres, faire daughters of high Jove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Night; the which were all endewed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With wondrous beauty fit to kindle love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But they were virgins all, and love eschewed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That might forslack the charge to them foreshewed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By mighty Jove; who did them porters make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of heavens gate (whence all the gods issued)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which they did daily watch, and nightly wake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By even turnes, ne ever did their charge forsake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And after all came Life, and lastly Death;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Death with most grim and griesly visage scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet is he nought but parting of the breath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought to see, but like a shade to weene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unbodied, unsoul'd, unheard, unseene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Life was like a faire young lusty boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as they faine Dan Cupid to have beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of delightfull health and lively joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deckt all with flowres, and wings of gold fit to employ.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When these were past, thus gan the Titanesse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Lo! mighty mother, now be judge, and say</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether in all thy creatures more or lesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><b>Change</b> doth not raign and bear the greatest sway;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For who sees not that Time on all doth pray?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Times do change and move continually:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So nothing heere long standeth in one stay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherefore this lower world who can deny</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to be subject still to Mutability?"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then thus gan Jove: "Right true it is, that these</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all things else that under heaven dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are chaung'd of Time, who doth them all disseise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of being: But who is it (to me tell)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Time himselfe doth move, and still compell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To keepe his course? Is not that namely wee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which poure that vertue from our heavenly cell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That moves them all, and makes them changed be?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So them we gods do rule, and in them also thee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom thus Mutability: "The things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which we see not how they are mov'd and swayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye may attribute to your selves as Kings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And say, they by your secret powre are made:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But what we see not, who shall us perswade?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But were they so, as ye them faine to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mov'd by your might and ordered by your ayde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet what if I can prove, that even yee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your selves are likewise chang'd, and subject unto mee?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"And first, concerning her that is the first,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even you, faire Cynthia; whom so much ye make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Joves dearest darling, she was bred and nurst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On Cynthus hill, whence she her name did take;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then is she mortall borne, how-so ye crake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besides, her face and countenance every day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We changed see and sundry formes partake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now hornd, now round, now bright, now browne and gray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that 'as changefull as the Moone' men use to say.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Next Mercury; who though he lesse appeare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To change his hew, and alwayes seeme as one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet he his course doth alter every yeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And is of late far out of order gone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So Venus eeke, that goodly Paragone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though faire all night, yet is she darke all day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Phoebus selfe, who lightsome is alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet is he oft eclipsed by the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fills the darkned world with terror and dismay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Now Mars, that valiant man, is changed most;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he sometimes so far runnes out of square,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he his way doth seem quite to have lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cleane without his usuall spheere to fare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That even these Star-gazers stonisht are</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At sight thereof, and damne their lying bookes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So likewise grim Sir Saturne oft doth spare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His sterne aspect, and calme his crabbed lookes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So many turning cranks these have, so many crookes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"But you, Dan Jove, that only constant are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And King of all the rest, as ye doe clame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are you not subjedt eeke to this misfare?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, let me aske you this withouten blame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where were ye borne? Some say in Crete by name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Others in Thebes, and others other-where;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, wheresoever they comment the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They all consent that ye begotten were</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And borne here in this world; ne other can appeare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Then are ye mortall borne, and thrall to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unlesse the kingdome of the sky yee make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Immortall and unchangeable to be:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besides, that power and vertue which ye spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ye here worke, doth many changes take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And your owne natures change; for each of you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That vertue have or this or that to make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is checkt and changed from his nature trew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By others opposition or obliquid view.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Besides, the sundry motions of your Spheares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So sundry wayes and fashions as clerkes faine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some in short space, and some in longer yeares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What is the same but alteration plaine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Onely the starry skie doth still remaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet do the Starres and Signes therein still move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And even itselfe is mov'd, as wizards saine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all that moveth doth mutation love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore both you and them to me I subject prove.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Then, since within this wide great Universe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nothing doth firme and permanent appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all things tost and turned by transverse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What then should let, but I aloft should reare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Trophee, and from all the triumph beare?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now judge then, (O thou greatest goddesse trew)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">According as thy selfe doest see and heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto me addoom that is my dew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is, the rule of all, all being rul'd by you."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So having ended, silence long ensewed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nature to or fro spake for a space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with firme eyes affixt the ground still viewed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Meane-while all creatures, looking in her face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Expecting th'end of this so doubtfull case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did hang in long suspence what would ensew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whether side should fall the soveraine place:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At length she, looking up with chearefull view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The silence brake, and gave her doome in speeches few.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"I well consider all that ye have said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And find that all things stedfastnesse do hate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And changed be; yet, being rightly wayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They are not changed from their first estate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by their change their being do dilate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And turning to themselves at length againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do worke their owne perfection so by fate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then over them Change doth not rule and raigne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But they raigne over Change, and do their states maintaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Cease therefore, daughter, further to aspire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thee content thus to be rul'd by mee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thy decay thou seekst by thy desire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But time shall come that all shall changed bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from thenceforth none no more change shal see."</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So was the Titanesse put downe and whist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Jove confirm'd in his imperiall see.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then was that whole assembly quite dismist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Natur's selfe did vanish, whither no man wist.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="mutability-canto-8" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</span>
					</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="title">Unperfite</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>When I bethink me, on that speech whyleare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Mutabilitie, and well it way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me seemes, that though she all unworthy were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the heav'ns rule; yet, very sooth to say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In all things else she bears the greatest sway.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which makes me loath this state of life so tickle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And love of things so vaine to cast away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose flowring pride, so fading and so fickle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Short Time shall soon cut down with his consuming sickle.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then gin I thihke on that which Nature said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that same time when no more Chance shall be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But stedfast rest of all things, firmly stayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the Pillours of Eternity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is contrayr, to Mutabilitie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all that moveth doth in Change delight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But thenceforth all shall rest eternally</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Him that is the God of Sabaoth hight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O that great Sabaoth God, grant me that sabaoths sight.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
