<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book III: The Legend of Britomartis, or of Chastity</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-3" epub:type="part z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Legend of Britomartis, or of Chastity</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="book-3-prologue" epub:type="prologue">
				<p>
					<span>It falles me here to write of Chastity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fayrest vertue, far above the rest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which what needes me fetch from Faery</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forreine ensamples it to have exprest?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith it is shrined in my Soveraines brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And formd so lively in each perfect part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to all Ladies, which have it profest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Need but behold the pourtraict of her hart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If pourtrayd it might bee by any living art.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But living art may not least part expresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor life-resembling pencill it can paynt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All were it Zeuxis or Praxiteles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His dædale hand would faile and greatly faynt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her perfections with his error taynt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne Poets witt, that passeth Painter farre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In picturing the parts of beauty daynt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So hard a workemanship adventure darre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For fear, through want of words, her excellence to marre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>How then shall I, Apprentice to the skill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That whilome in divinest wits did rayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Presume so high to stretch mine humble quill?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet now my luckelesse lott doth me constrayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hereto perforce. But, O dredd Soverayne!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus far-forth pardon, sith that choicest witt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cannot your glorious pourtraict figure playne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I in colourd showes may shadow itt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And antique praises unto present persons fitt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But if in living colours, and right hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy selfe thou covet to see pictured,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who can it doe more lively, or more trew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then that sweete verse, with Nectar sprinckeled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which a gracious servaunt pictured</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His Cynthia, his heavens fayrest light?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with his melting sweetnes ravished,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with the wonder of her beames bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sences lulled are in slomber of delight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But let that same delitious Poet lend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A little leave unto a rusticke Muse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sing his mistresse prayse; and let him mend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If ought amis her liking may abuse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne let his fayrest Cynthia refuse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In mirrours more then one her selfe to see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But either Gloriana let her chuse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or in Belphœbe fashioned to bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In th’one her rule, in th’other her rare chastitee.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Guyon encountreth Britomart:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Fayre Florimell is chaced:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Duessaes traines and Malecastaes</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Champions are defaced.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The famous Briton Prince and Faerie knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After long wayes and perilous paines endur’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having their weary limbes to perfect plight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Restord, and sory wounds right well recur’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the faire Alma greatly were procur’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make there lenger sojourne and abode;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when thereto they might not be allur’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From seeking praise and deeds of armes abrode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They courteous congé tooke, and forth together yode.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But the captiv’d Acrasia he sent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because of traveill long, a nigher way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a strong gard, all reskew to prevent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her to Faery court safe to convay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her for witnes of his hard assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto his Faery Queene he might present:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he him selfe betooke another way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make more triall of his hardiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seek adventures as he with Prince Arthure went.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Long so they traveiled through wastefull wayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where daungers dwelt, and perils most did wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hunt for glory and renowmed prayse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full many Countreyes they did overronne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the uprising to the setting Sunne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many hard adventures did atchieve;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the which they honour ever wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeking the weake oppressed to relieve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to recover right for such as wrong did grieve.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last, as through an open plaine they yode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They spide a knight that towards pricked fayre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him beside an aged Squire there rode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemd to couch under his shield three-square,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if that age badd him that burden spare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yield it those that stouter could it wield.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He them espying gan him selfe prepare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on his arme addresse his goodly shield</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That bore a Lion passant in a golden field.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which seeing, good Sir Guyon deare besought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Prince of grace to let him ronne that turne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He graunted: then the Faery quickly raught</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His poynant speare, and sharply gan to spurne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His fomy steed, whose fiery feete did burne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The verdant gras as he thereon did tread;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne did the other backe his foote returne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But fiercely forward came withouten dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bent his dreadful speare against the others head.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They beene ymett, and both theyr points arriv’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Guyon drove so furious and fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemd both shield and plate it would have riv’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nathelesse it bore his foe not from his sell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But made him stagger, as he were not well:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Guyon selfe, ere well he was aware,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nigh a speares length behind his crouper fell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet in his fall so well him selfe he bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That mischievous mischaunce his life and limbs did spare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Great shame and sorrow of that fall he tooke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For never yet, sith warlike armes he bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shivering speare in bloody field first shooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He fownd him selfe dishonored so sore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah! gentlest knight, that ever armor bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let not thee grieve dismounted to have beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And brought to grownd that never wast before;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For not thy fault, but secret powre unseene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That speare enchaunted was which layd thee on the greene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But weenedst thou what wight thee overthrew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much greater griefe and shamefuller regrett</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thy hard fortune then thou wouldst renew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of a single damzell thou wert mett</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On equall plaine, and there so hard besett:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even the famous Britomart it was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom straunge adventure did from Britayne sett</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke her lover (love far sought alas!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose image shee had seene in Venus looking glas.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Full of disdainefull wrath he fierce uprose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For to revenge that fowle reprochefull shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And snatching his bright sword began to close</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With her on foot, and stoutly forward came:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dye rather would he then endure that same.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when his Palmer saw, he gan to feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His toward perill, and untoward blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which by that new rencounter he should reare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For death sate on the point of that enchaunted speare:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And hasting towards him gan fayre perswade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not to provoke misfortune, nor to weene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His speares default to mend with cruell blade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For by his mightie Science he had seene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The secrete vertue of that weapon keene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That mortall puissaunce mote not withstond.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nothing on earth mote alwaies happy beene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great hazard were it, and adventure fond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To loose long gotten honour with one evill hond.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By such good meanes he him discounselled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From prosecuting his revenging rage:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the Prince like treaty handeled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His wrathfull will with reason to aswage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And laid the blame, not to his carriage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to his starting steed that swarv’d asyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the ill purveyaunce of his page,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That had his furnitures not firmely tyde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So is his angry corage fayrly pacifyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus reconcilement was betweene them knitt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through goodly temperaunce and affection chaste;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And either vowd with all their power and witt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To let not others honour be defaste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of friend or foe, who ever it embaste;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne armes to beare against the others syde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which accord the Prince was also plaste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with that golden chaine of concord tyde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So goodly all agreed they forth yfere did ryde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O! goodly usage of those antique tymes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which the sword was servaunt unto right;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When not for malice and contentious crymes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all for prayse, and proofe of manly might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The martiall brood accustomed to fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then honour was the meed of victory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet the vanquished had no despight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let later age that noble use envy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vyle rancor to avoid and cruel surquedry.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Long they thus travelled in friendly wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through countreyes waste, and eke well edifyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeking adventures hard, to exercise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their puissaunce, whylome full dernly tryde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At length they came into a forest wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose hideous horror and sad trembling sownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full griesly seemd: Therein they long did ryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet tract of living creature none they fownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save Beares, Lyons, and Buls, which romed them arownd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All suddenly out of the thickest brush,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a milkwhite Palfrey all alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A goodly Lady did foreby them rush,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose face did seeme as cleare as Christall stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke, through feare, as white as whales bone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her garments all were wrought of beaten gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all her steed with tinsell trappings shone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which fledd so fast that nothing mote him hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And scarse them leasure gave her passing to behold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Still as she fledd her eye she backward threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As fearing evill that poursewd her fast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her faire yellow locks behind her flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Loosely disperst with puff of every blast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All as a blazing starre doth farre outcast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His hearie beames, and flaming lockes dispredd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At sight whereof the people stand aghast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the sage wisard telles, as he has redd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it importunes death and dolefull dreryhedd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So as they gazed after her a whyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lo! where a griesly foster forth did rush,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Breathing out beastly lust her to defyle:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His tyreling Jade he fiersly forth did push</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through thicke and thin, both over banck and bush,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hope her to attaine by hooke or crooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from his gory sydes the blood did gush.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Large were his limbes, and terrible his looke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in his clownish hand a sharp bore speare he shooke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which outrage when those gentle knights did see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of great envy and fell gealosy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They stayd not to avise who first should bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all spurd after, fast as they mote fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To reskew her from shamefull villany.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Prince and Guyon equally bylive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her selfe pursewd, in hope to win thereby</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most goodly meede, the fairest Dame alive:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But after the foule foster Timias did strive.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The whiles faire Britomart, whose constant mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would not so lightly follow beauties chace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne reckt of Ladies Love, did stay behynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And them awayted there a certaine space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet if they would turne backe to that place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when she saw them gone she forward went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As lay her journey, through that perlous Pace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With stedfast corage and stout hardiment:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne evil thing she feard, ne evill thing she ment.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last, as nigh out of the wood she came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A stately Castle far away she spyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which her steps directly she did frame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Castle was most goodly edifyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And plaste for pleasure nigh that forrest syde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But faire before the gate a spatious playne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mantled with greene, it selfe did spredden wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which she saw six knights, that did darrayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fiers battaill against one with cruell might and mayne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Mainely they all attonce upon him laid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sore beset on every side arownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nigh he breathlesse grew, yet nought dismaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever to them yielded foot of grownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All had he lost much blood through many a wownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But stoutly dealt his blowes, and every way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which he turned in his wrathfull stownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made them recoile, and fly from dredd decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That none of all the six before him durst assay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like dastard Curres that, having at a bay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The salvage beast embost in wearie chace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dare not adventure on the stubborne pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne byte before, but rome from place to place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To get a snatch when turned is his face.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In such distresse and doubtfull jeopardy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When Britomart him saw, she ran apace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto his reskew, and with earnest cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Badd those same six forbeare that single enimy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But to her cry they list not lenden care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought the more their mightie strokes surceasse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But gathering him rownd about more neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their direfull rancour rather did encreasse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that she rushing through the thickest preasse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perforce disparted their compacted gyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soone compeld to hearken unto peace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho gan she myldly of them to inquyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cause of their dissention and outrageous yre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whereto that single knight did answere frame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“These six would me enforce by oddes of might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To chaunge my liefe, and love another Dame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That death me liefer were then such despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So unto wrong to yield my wrested right:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For I love one, the truest one on grownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne list me chaunge; she th’Errant Damzell hight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For whose deare sake full many a bitter stownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have endurd, and tasted many a bloody wownd.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Certes,” (said she) “then beene ye sixe to blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weene your wrong by force to justify;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For knight to leave his Lady were great shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That faithfull is, and better were to dy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All losse is lesse, and lesse the infamy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then losse of love to him that loves but one:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne may love be compeld by maistery;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For soone as maistery comes sweet Love anone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Taketh his nimble winges, and soone away is gone.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then spake one of those six; “There dwelleth here</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within this castle wall a Lady fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose soveraine beautie hath no living pere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereto so bounteous and so debonayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That never any mote with her compayre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She hath ordaind this law, which we approve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That every knight which doth this way repayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In case he have no Lady nor no love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall doe unto her service, never to remove:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But if he have a Lady or a Love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then must he her forgoe with fowle defame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or els with us by dint of sword approve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she is fairer then our fairest Dame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As did this knight, before ye hither came.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Perdy,” (said Britomart) “the choise is hard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But what reward had he that overcame?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“He should advaunced bee to high regard,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Said they) “and have our Ladies love for his reward.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Therefore aread, Sir, if thou have a love.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Love have I sure,” (quoth she) “but Lady none;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet will I not fro mine own love remove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne to your Lady will I service done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wreake your wronges wrought to this knight alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And prove his cause.” With that, her mortall speare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She mightily aventred towards one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And downe him smot ere well aware he weare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then to the next she rode, and downe the next did beare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne did she stay till three on ground she layd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none of them himselfe could reare againe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fourth was by that other knight dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All were he wearie of his former paine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That now there do but two of six remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which two did yield before she did them smight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Ah!” (said she then) “now may ye all see plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That truth is strong, and trew love most of might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That for his trusty servaunts doth so strongly fight.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Too well we see,” (saide they) “and prove too well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our faulty weakenes, and your matchlesse might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forthy, faire Sir, yours be the Damozell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which by her owne law to your lot doth light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And we your liegemen faith unto you plight.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So underneath her feet their swords they mard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, after, her besought, well as they might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To enter in and reape the dew reward.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She graunted; and then in they all together far’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Long were it to describe the goodly frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stately port of Castle Joyeous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(For so that Castle hight by commun name)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where they were entertaynd with courteous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And comely glee of many gratious</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Ladies, and of many a gentle knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, through a Chamber long and spacious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones them brought unto their Ladies sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That of them cleeped was the Lady of Delight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But for to tell the sumptuous aray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that great chamber, should be labour lost;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For living wit, I weene, cannot display</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The royall riches and exceeding cost</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of every pillour and of every post,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which all of purest bullion framed were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with great perles and pretious stones embost;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the bright glister of their beames cleare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did sparckle forth great light, and glorious did appeare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>These stranger knights, through passing, forth were led</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into an inner rowme, whose royaltee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rich purveyance might uneath be red;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mote Princes place be seeme so deckt to bee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which stately manner whenas they did see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The image of superfluous riotize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Exceeding much the state of meane degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They greatly wondred whence so sumptuous guize</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might be maintaynd, and each gan diversely devize.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The wals were round about appareiled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With costly clothes of Arras and of Toure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which with cunning hand was pourtrahed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The love of Venus and her Paramoure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fayre Adonis, turned to a flowre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A worke of rare device and wondrous wit.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First did it shew the bitter balefull stowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which her essayd with many a fervent fit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When first her tender hart was with his beautie smit.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then with what sleights and sweet allurements she</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Entyst the Boy, as well that art she knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wooed him her Paramoure to bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now making girlonds of each flowre that grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To crowne his golden lockes with honour dew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now leading him into a secret shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From his Beauperes, and from bright heavens vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where him to sleepe she gently would perswade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or bathe him in a fountaine by some covert glade:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And whilst he slept she over him would spred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her mantle, colour’d like the starry skyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her soft arme lay underneath his hed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with ambrosiall kisses bathe his eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And whilst he bath’d with her two crafty spyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She secretly would search each daintie lim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And throw into the well sweet Rosemaryes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fragrant violets, and Paunces trim;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ever with sweet Nectar she did sprinkle him.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So did she steale his heedelesse hart away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And joyd his love in secret unespyde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But for she saw him bent to cruell play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hunt the salvage beast in forrest wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dreadfull of daunger that mote him betyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She oft and oft adviz’d him to refraine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From chase of greater beastes, whose brutish pryde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mote breede him scath unwares: but all in vaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For who can shun the chance that dest’ny doth ordaine?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lo! where beyond he lyeth languishing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deadly engored of a great wilde Bore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by his side the Goddesse groveling</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Makes for him endlesse mone, and evermore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With her soft garment wipes away the gore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which staynes his snowy skin with hatefull hew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when she saw no helpe might him restore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him to a dainty flowre she did transmew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which in that cloth was wrought as if it lively grew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So was that chamber clad in goodly wize:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rownd about it many beds were dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As whylome was the antique worldes guize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some for untimely ease, some for delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As pleased them to use that use it might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all was full of Damzels and of Squyres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dauncing and reveling both day and night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And swimming deepe in sensuall desyres;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Cupid still emongest them kindled lustfull fyres.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And all the while sweet Musicke did divide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her looser notes with Lydian harmony;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the while sweet birdes thereto applide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their daintie layes and dulcet melody,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ay caroling of love and jollity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That wonder was to heare their trim consort.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when those knights beheld, with scornefull eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They sdeigned such lascivious disport,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And loath’d the loose demeanure of that wanton sort.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thence they were brought to that great Ladies vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom they found sitting on a sumptuous bed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That glistred all with gold and glorious shew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As the proud Persian Queenes accustomed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She seemd a woman of great bountihed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of rare beautie, saving that askaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her wanton eyes, ill signes of womanhed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did roll too lightly, and too often glaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without regard of grace or comely amenaunce.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Long worke it were, and needlesse, to devize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their goodly entertainement and great glee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She caused them be led in courteous wize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into a bowre, disarmed for to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cheared well with wine and spiceree:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Redcrosse Knight was soon disarmed there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the brave Mayd would not disarmed bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But onely vented up her umbriere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so did let her goodly visage to appere.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when fayre Cynthia, in darkesome night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is in a noyous cloud enveloped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where she may finde the substance thin and light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Breakes forth her silver beames, and her bright hed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Discovers to the world discomfited:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the poore traveiler that went astray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With thousand blessings she is heried.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such was the beautie and the shining ray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With which fayre Britomart gave light unto the day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And eke those six, which lately with her fought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now were disarmd, and did them selves present</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto her vew, and company unsought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For they all seemed courteous and gent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all sixe brethren, borne of one parent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which had them traynd in all civilitee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And goodly taught to tilt and turnament:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now were they liegmen to this Ladie free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her knights service ought, to hold of her in fee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The first of them by name Gardantè hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A jolly person, and of comely vew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The second was Parlantè, a bold knight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And next to him Jocantè did ensew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Basciantè did him selfe most courteous shew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But fierce Bacchantè seemd too fell and keene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yett in armes Noctantè greater grew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All were faire knights, and goodly well beseene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to faire Britomart they all but shadowes beene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For shee was full of amiable grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And manly terror mixed therewithall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That as the one stird up affections bace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So th’other did mens rash desires apall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hold them backe that would in error fall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As hee that hath espide a vermeill Rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which sharp thornes and breres the way forstall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dare not for dread his hardy hand expose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But wishing it far off his ydle wish doth lose.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when the Lady saw so faire a wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All ignorant of her contrary sex,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(For shee her weend a fresh and lusty knight,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee greatly gan enamoured to wex</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with vaine thoughts her falsed fancy vex:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her fickle hart conceived hasty fyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like sparkes of fire which fall in sclender flex,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shortly brent into extreme desyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ransackt all her veines with passion entyre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones shee grew to great impatience,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And into termes of open outrage brust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That plaine discovered her incontinence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne reckt shee who her meaning did mistrust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she was given all to fleshly lust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And poured forth in sensuall delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all regard of shame she had discust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And meet respect of honor putt to flight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So shamelesse beauty soone becomes a loathly sight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Faire Ladies, that to love captived arre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chaste desires doe nourish in your mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let not her fault your sweete affections marre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne blott the bounty of all womankind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Mongst thousands good one wanton Dame to find:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emongst the Roses grow some wicked weeds:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For this was not to love, but lust, inclind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For love does alwaies bring forth bounteous deeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in each gentle hart desire of honor breeds.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nought so of love this looser Dame did skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But as a coale to kindle fleshly flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Giving the bridle to her wanton will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And treading under foote her honest name:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such love is hate, and such desire is shame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still did she rove at her with crafty glaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her false eies, that at her hart did ayme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And told her meaning in her countenaunce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Britomart dissembled it with ignoraunce.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Supper was shortly dight, and downe they sat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where they were served with all sumptuous fare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles fruitfull Ceres and Lyæus fat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pourd out their plenty without spight or spare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nought wanted there that dainty was and rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And aye the cups their bancks did overflow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And aye betweene the cups she did prepare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Way to her love, and secret darts did throw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Britomart would not such guilfull message know.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So, when they slaked had the fervent heat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of appetite with meates of every sort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Lady did faire Britomart entreat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her to disarme, and with delightfull sport</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To loose her warlike limbs and strong effort;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when shee mote not thereunto be wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(For shee her sexe under that straunge purport</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did use to hide, and plaine apparaunce shonne)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In playner wise to tell her grievaunce she begonne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And all attonce discovered her desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sighes, and sobs, and plaints, and piteous griefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The outward sparkes of her inburning fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which spent in vaine, at last she told her briefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That but if she did lend her short reliefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doe her comfort, she mote algates dye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the chaste damzell, that had never priefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of such malengine and fine forgerye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did easely beleeve her strong extremitye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Full easy was for her to have beliefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who by self-feeling of her feeble sexe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by long triall of the inward griefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith imperious love her hart did vexe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could judge what paines doe loving harts perplexe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who meanes no guile be guiled soonest shall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to faire semblaunce doth light faith annexe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bird that knowes not the false fowlers call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into his hidden nett full easely doth fall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Forthy she would not in discourteise wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Scorne the faire offer of good will profest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For great rebuke it is love to despise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or rudely sdeigne a gentle harts request;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with faire countenaunce, as beseemed best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her entertaynd: nath’lesse shee inly deemd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her love too light, to wooe a wandring guest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which she misconstruing, thereby esteemd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That from like inward fire that outward smoke had steemd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith a while she her flit fancy fedd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till she mote winne fit time for her desire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yet her wound still inward freshly bledd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through her bones the false instilled fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did spred itself, and venime close inspire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho were the tables taken all away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every knight, and every gentle Squire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan choose his Dame with <em>Bascimano</em> gay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With whom he ment to make his sport and courtly play.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Some fell to daunce, some fell to hazardry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some to make love, some to make meryment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As diverse witts to diverse things apply;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the while faire Malecasta bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her crafty engins to her close intent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By this th’eternall lampes, wherewith high Jove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth light the lower world, were halfe yspent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the moist daughters of huge Atlas strove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the Ocean deepe to drive their weary drove.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>High time it seemed then for every wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them to betake unto their kindly rest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftesoones long waxen torches weren light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto their bowres to guyden every guest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, when the Britonesse saw all the rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Avoided quite, she gan her selfe despoile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And safe committ to her soft fethered nest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wher through long watch, and late daies weary toile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She soundly slept, and carefull thoughts did quite assoile.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now whenas all the world in silence deepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yshrowded was, and every mortall wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was drowned in the depth of deadly sleepe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Malecasta, whose engrieved spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could find no rest in such perplexed plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lightly arose out of her wearie bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, under the blacke vele of guilty Night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her with a scarlott mantle covered</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That was with gold and Ermines faire enveloped.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then panting softe, and trembling every joynt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her fearfull feete towards the bowre she mov’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where she for secret purpose did appoynt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To lodge the warlike maide, unwisely loov’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, to her bed approching, first she proov’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether she slept or wakte: with her softe hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She softely felt if any member moov’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lent her wary eare to understand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If any puffe of breath or signe of sence shee fond.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which whenas none she fond, with easy shifte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For feare least her unwares she should abrayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th’embroder’d quilt she lightly up did lifte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by her side her selfe she softly layd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of every finest fingers touch affrayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne any noise she made, ne word she spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But inly sigh’d. At last the royall Mayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of her quiet slomber did awake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And chaunged her weary side the better ease to take.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Where feeling one close couched by her side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She lightly lept out of her filed bedd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to her weapon ran, in minde to gride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The loathed leachour. But the Dame, halfe dedd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through suddein feare and ghastly drerihedd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did shrieke alowd, that through the hous it rong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the whole family, therewith adredd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rashly out of their rouzed couches sprong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the troubled chamber all in armes did throng.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And those sixe knights, that ladies Champions</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the Redcrosse knight ran to the stownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Halfe armd and halfe unarmd, with them attons:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where when confusedly they came, they fownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their lady lying on the sencelesse grownd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On thother side they saw the warlike Mayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Al in her snow-white smocke, with locks unbownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Threatning the point of her avenging blaed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That with so troublous terror they were all dismayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>About their Ladye first they flockt arownd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom having laid in comfortable couch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shortly they reard out of her frosen swownd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And afterwardes they gan with fowle reproch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To stirre up strife, and troublous contecke broch:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by ensample of the last dayes losse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">None of them rashly durst to her approch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne in so glorious spoile themselves embosse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her succourd eke the Champion of the bloody Crosse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But one of those sixe knights, Gardantè hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drew out a deadly bow and arrow keene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which forth be sent, with felonous despight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fell intent, against the virgin sheene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The mortall steele stayd not till it was seene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To gore her side; yet was the wound not deepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But lightly rased her soft silken skin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That drops of purple blood thereout did weepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which did her lilly smock with staines of vermeil steep.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Wherewith enrag’d she fiercely at them flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with her flaming sword about her layd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none of them foule mischiefe could eschew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with her dreadfull strokes were all dismayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here, there, and every where, about her swayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her wrathfull steele, that none mote it abyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the Redcrosse knight gave her good ayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ay joyning foot to foot, and syde to syde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in short space their foes they have quite terrifyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho, whenas all were put to shamefull flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The noble Britomartis her arayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her bright armes about her body dight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For nothing would she lenger there be stayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where so loose life, and so ungentle trade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was usd of knightes and Ladies seeming gent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So earely, ere the grosse Earthes gryesy shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was all disperst out of the firmament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They tooke their steeds, and forth upon their journey went.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The Redcrosse knight to Britomart</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Describeth Artegall:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The wondrous myrrhour, by which she</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In love with him did fall.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Here have I cause in men just blame to find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in their proper praise too partiall bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And not indifferent to woman kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom no share in armes and chevalree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They doe impart, ne maken memoree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of their brave gestes and prowesse martiall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Scarse do they spare to one, or two, or three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rowme in their writtes; yet the same writing small</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Does all their deedes deface, and dims their glories all.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But by record of antique times I finde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That wemen wont in warres to beare most sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to all great exploites them selves inclind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which they still the girlond bore away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till envious Men, fearing their rules decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan coyne streight lawes to curb their liberty:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet sith they warlike armes have laide away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They have exceld in artes and pollicy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That now we foolish men that prayse gin eke t’envy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Of warlike puissaunce in ages spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be thou, faire Britomart, whose prayse I wryte;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But of all wisedom bee thou precedent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O soveraine Queene! whose prayse I would endyte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Endite I would as dewtie doth excyte;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But ah! my rymes too rude and rugged arre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When in so high an object they do lyte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, striving fit to make, I feare, doe marre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy selfe thy prayses tell, and make them knowen farre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She, traveiling with Guyon, by the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of sondry thinges faire purpose gan to find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T’abridg their journey long, and lingring day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst which it fell into that Fairies mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To aske this Briton Maid, what uncouth wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Brought her into those partes, and what inquest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made her dissemble her disguised kind?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Lady she him seemd, like Lady drest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But fairest knight alive, when armed was her brest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereat she sighing softly had no powre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To speake a while, ne ready answere make;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with hart-thrilling throbs and bitter stowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if she had a fever fitt, did quake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every daintie limbe with horrour shake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever and anone the rosy red</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flasht through her face, as it had beene a flake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of lightning through bright heven fulmined:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last, the passion past, she thus him answered.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Faire Sir, I let you weete, that from the howre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I taken was from nourses tender pap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I have been trained up in warlike stowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tossen speare and shield, and to affrap</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The warlike ryder to his most mishap:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sithence I loathed have my life to lead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Ladies wont, in pleasures wanton lap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To finger the fine needle and nyce thread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me lever were with point of foemans speare be dead.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“All my delight on deedes of armes is set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hunt out perilles and adventures hard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By sea, by land, where so they may be met,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Onely for honour and for high regard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without respect of richesse or reward:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For such intent into these partes I came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withouten compasse or withouten card,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far fro my native soyle, that is by name</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The greater Brytayne, here to seek for praise and fame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Fame blazed hath, that here in Faery lond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe many famous Knightes and Ladies wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many straunge adventures to bee fond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which great worth and worship may be wonne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to prove, I this voyage have begonne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But mote I weet of you, right courteous knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tydings of one that hath unto me donne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Late foule dishonour and reprochfull spight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which I seeke to wreake, and Arthegall he hight.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The worde gone out she backe againe would call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As her repenting so to have missayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that he, it uptaking ere the fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her shortly answered: “Faire martiall Mayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Certes ye misavised beene t’upbrayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A gentle knight with so unknightly blame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, weet ye well, of all that ever playd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At tilt or tourney, or like warlike game,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The noble Arthegall hath ever borne the name.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Forthy great wonder were it, if such shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should ever enter in his bounteous thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ever doe that mote deserven blame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The noble corage never weeneth ought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That may unworthy of it selfe be thought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore, faire Damzell, be ye well aware,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least that too farre ye have your sorrow sought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You and your countrey both I wish welfare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And honour both; for each of other worthy are.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The royall Maid woxe inly wondrous glad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To heare her Love so highly magnifyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And joyd that ever she affixed had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her hart on knight so goodly glorifyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How ever finely she it faind to hyde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The loving mother, that nine monethes did beare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the deare closett of her painefull syde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her tender babe, it seeing safe appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth not so much rejoyce as she rejoyced theare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But to occasion him to further talke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To feed her humor with his pleasing style,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her list in stryfull termes with him to balke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thus replyde: “How ever, Sir, ye fyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your courteous tongue his prayses to compyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It ill beseemes a knight of gentle sort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as ye have him boasted, to beguyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A simple maide, and worke so hainous tort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In shame of knighthood, as I largely can report.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Let bee therefore my vengeaunce to disswade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And read where I that faytour false may find.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Ah! bat if reason faire might you perswade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To slake your wrath, and mollify your mind,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Said he) “perhaps ye should it better find:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For hardie thing it is, to weene by might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That man to hard conditions to bind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ever hope to match in equall fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose prowesse paragone saw never living wight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ne soothlich is it easie for to read</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where now on earth, or how, he may be fownd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he ne wonneth in one certeine stead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But restlesse walketh all the world arownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ay doing thinges that to his fame redownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Defending Ladies cause and Orphans right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereso he heares that any doth confownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them comfortlesse through tyranny or might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So is his soveraine honour raisde to hevens hight.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His feeling wordes her feeble sence much pleased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And softly sunck into her molten hart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hart that is inly hurt is greatly eased</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hope of thing that may allegge his smart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For pleasing wordes are like to Magick art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That doth the charmed Snake in slomber lay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such secrete ease felt gentle Britomart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet list the same efforce with faind gainesay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So dischord ofte in Musick makes the sweeter lay:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And sayd; “Sir knight, these ydle termes forbeare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, sith it is uneath to finde his haunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tell me some markes by which he may appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If chaunce I him encounter paravaunt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For perdy one shall other slay, or daunt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What shape, what shield, what armes, what steed, what stedd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And what so else his person most may vaunt?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which the Redcrosse knight to point aredd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And him in everie part before her fashioned.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet him in everie part before she knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">However list her now her knowledge fayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith him whylome in Britayne she did vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To her revealed in a mirrhour playne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof did grow her first engraffed payne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose root and stalke so bitter yet did taste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That but the fruit more sweetnes did contayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her wretched dayes in dolour she mote waste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yield the pray of love to lothsome death at last.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By straunge occasion she did him behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And much more straungely gan to love his sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As it in bookes hath written beene of old.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Deheubarth, that now South-wales is hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What time king Ryence raign’d and dealed right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The great Magitien Merlin had deviz’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By his deepe science and hell-dreaded might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A looking glasse, right wondrously aguiz’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose vertues through the wyde worlde soone were solemniz’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It vertue had to shew in perfect sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whatever thing was in the world contaynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Betwixt the lowest earth and hevens hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that it to the looker appertaynd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whatever foe had wrought, or frend had faynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therein discovered was, ne ought mote pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought in secret from the same remaynd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forthy it round and hollow shaped was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like to the world itselfe, and seemd a world of glas.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who wonders not, that reades so wonderous worke?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But who does wonder, that has red the Towre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein th’Aegyptian Phao long did lurke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From all mens vew, that none might her discoure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet she might all men vew out of her bowre?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great Ptolomæe it for his lemans sake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ybuilded all of glasse, by Magicke powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And also it impregnable did make;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet when his love was false he with a peaze it brake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such was the glassy globe that Merlin made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gave unto king Ryence for his gard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That never foes his kingdome might invade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he it knew at home before he hard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tydings thereof, and so them still debar’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It was a famous Present for a Prince,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And worthy worke of infinite reward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That treasons could bewray, and foes convince:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Happy this Realme, had it remayned ever since!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One day it fortuned fayre Britomart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into her fathers closet to repayre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For nothing he from her reserv’d apart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being his onely daughter and his hayre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where when she had espyde that mirrhour fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her selfe awhile therein she vewd in vaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, her avizing of the vertues rare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which thereof spoken were, she gan againe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her to bethinke of that mote to her selfe pertaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But as it falleth, in the gentlest harts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Imperious Love hath highest set his throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tyrannizeth in the bitter smarts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of them that to him buxome are and prone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So thought this Mayd (as maydens use to done)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom fortune for her husband would allot:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not that she lusted after any one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she was pure from blame of sinfull blott;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet wist her life at last must lincke in that same knot.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones there was presented to her eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A comely knight; all arm’d in complete wize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through whose bright ventayle, lifted up on hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His manly face, that did his foes agrize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And frends to termes of gentle truce entize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lookt foorth, as Phœbus face out of the east</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Betwixt two shady mountaynes doth arize:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Portly his person was, and much increast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through his Heroicke grace and honorable gest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His crest was covered with a couchant Hownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all his armour seem’d of antique mould,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wondrous massie and assured sownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And round about yfretted all with gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which there written was, with cyphres old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">
						<em>Achilles armes, which Arthegall did win:</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on his shield enveloped sevenfold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He bore a crowned little Ermelin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That deckt the azure field with her fayre pouldred skin.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Damzell well did vew his Personage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And liked well, ne further fastned not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But went her way; ne her unguilty age</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did weene, unwares, that her unlucky lot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lay hidden in the bottome of the pot.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of hurt unwist most daunger doth redound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the false Archer, which that arrow shot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So slyly that she did not feele the wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did smyle full smoothly at her weetlesse wofull stound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thenceforth the fether in her lofty crest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ruffed of love, gan lowly to availe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her prowd portaunce and her princely gest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which she earst tryumphed, now did quaile:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sad, solemne, sowre, and full of fancies fraile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She woxe; yet wist she nether how, nor why.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She wist not, silly Mayd, what she did aile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet wist she was not well at ease perdy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet thought it was not love, but some melancholy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So soone as Night had with her pallid hew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Defaste the beautie of the shyning skye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And refte from men the worldes desired vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She with her Nourse adowne to sleepe did lye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But sleepe full far away from her did fly:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In stead thereof sad sighes and sorrowes deepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kept watch and ward about her warily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nought she did but wayle, and often steepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her dainty couch with teares which closely she did weepe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And if that any drop of slombring rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did chaunce to still into her weary spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When feeble nature felt her selfe opprest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Streight-way with dreames, and with fantastick sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of dreadfull things, the same was put to flight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That oft out of her bed she did astart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one with vew of ghastly feends affright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho gan she to renew her former smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thinke of that fayre visage written in her hart.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One night, when she was tost with such unrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her aged Nourse, whose name was Glaucè hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Feelmg her leape out or her loathed nest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Betwixt her feeble armes her quickly keight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And downe againe her in her warme bed dight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Ah! my deare daughter, ah! my dearest dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What uncouth fit,” (sayd she) “what evill plight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath thee opprest, and with sad drearyhead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chaunged thy lively cheare, and living made thee dead?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“For not of nought these suddein ghastly feares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All night afflict thy naturall repose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the day, when as thine equall peares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their fit disports with faire delight doe chose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou in dull corners doest thy selfe inclose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne tastest Princes pleasures, ne doest spred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abroad thy fresh youths fayrest flowre, but lose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both leafe and fruite, both too untimely shed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As one in wilfull bale for ever buried.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The time that mortall men their weary cares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do lay away, and all wilde beastes do rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every river eke his course forbeares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then doth this wicked evill thee infest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rive with thousand throbs thy thrilled brest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like an huge Aetn’ of deepe engulfed gryefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sorrow is heaped in thy hollow chest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence foorth it breakes in sighes and anguish ryfe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As smoke and sulphure mingled with confused stryfe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ay me! how much I feare least love it bee!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if that love it be, as sure I read</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By knowen signes and passions which I see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be it worthy of thy race and royall sead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then I avow, by this most sacred head</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of my deare foster childe, to ease thy griefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And win thy will: Therefore away doe dread;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For death nor daunger from thy dew reliefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall me debarre: tell me therefore, my liefest liefe!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So having sayd, her twixt her armes twaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee streightly straynd, and colled tenderly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every trembling joynt and every vaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee softly felt, and rubbed busily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To doe the frosen cold away to fly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her faire deawy eies with kisses deare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee ofte did bathe, and ofte againe did dry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever her importund not to feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To let the secret of her hart to her appeare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Damzell pauzd; and then thus fearfully:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Ah! Nurse, what needeth thee to eke my payne?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is not enough that I alone doe dye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But it must doubled bee with death of twaine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For nought for me but death there doth remaine.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“O daughter deare!” (said she) “despeire no whit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For never sore but might a salve obtaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That blinded God, which hath ye blindly smit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another arrow hath your lovers hart to hit.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But mine is not” (quoth she) “like other wownd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which no reason can finde remedy.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Was never such, but mote the like be fownd,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Said she) “and though no reason may apply</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Salve to your sore, yet love can higher stye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then reasons reach, and oft hath wonders donne.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“But neither God of love nor God of skye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can doe” (said she) “that which cannot be donne.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Things ofte impossible” (quoth she) “seeme, ere begonne.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“These idle wordes” (said she) “doe nought aswage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My stubborne smart, but more annoiaunce breed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For no, no usuall fire, no usuall rage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yt is, O Nourse! which on my life doth feed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sucks the blood which from my hart doth bleed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But since thy faithful zele lets me not hyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My crime, (if crime it be) I will it reed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor Prince nor pere it is, whose love hath gryde</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My feeble brest of late, and launched this wound wyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Nor man it is, nor other living wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For then some hope I might unto me draw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But th’only shade and semblant of a knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose shape or person yet I never saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath me subjected to loves cruell law:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The same one day, as me misfortune led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I in my fathers wondrous mirrhour saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, pleased with that seeming goodly-hed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unwares the hidden hooke with baite I swallowed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Sithens it hath infixed faster hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within my bleeding bowells, and so sore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now ranckleth in this same fraile fleshly mould,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all my entrailes flow with poisnous gore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And th’ulcer groweth daily more and more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne can my ronning sore finde remedee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Other then my hard fortune to deplore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And languish, as the leafe faln from the tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till death make one end of my daies and miseree!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Daughter,” (said she) “what need ye be dismayd?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or why make ye such Monster of your minde?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of much more uncouth thing I was affrayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of filthy lust, contrary unto kinde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But this affection nothing straunge I finde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For who with reason can you aye reprove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To love the semblaunt pleasing most your minde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yield your heart whence ye cannot remove?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No guilt in you, but in the tyranny of love.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Not so th’Arabian Myrrhe did set her mynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor so did Biblis spend her pining hart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But lov’d their native flesh against al kynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to their purpose used wicked art:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet playd Pasiphaë a more monstrous part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That lov’d a Bul, and learnd a beast to bee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such shamefull lustes who loaths not, which depart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From course of nature and of modestee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweete love such lewdnes bands from his faire companee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But thine, my Deare, (welfare thy heart, my deare!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though straunge beginning had, yet fixed is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On one that worthy may perhaps appeare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And certes seemes bestowed not amis:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Joy thereof have thou and eternall blis!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that, upleaning on her elbow weake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her alablaster brest she soft did kis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which all that while shee felt to pant and quake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As it an Earth-quake were: at last she thus bespake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Beldame, your words doe worke me litle ease;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For though my love be not so lewdly bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As those ye blame, yet may it nought appease</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My raging smart, ne ought my flame relent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But rather doth my helpelesse griefe augment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For they, how ever shamefull and unkinde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet did possesse their horrible intent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Short end of sorrowes they therby did finde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So was their fortune good, though wicked were their minde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But wicked fortune mine, though minde be good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can have no ende nor hope of my desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But feed on shadowes whiles I die for food,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And like a shadowe wexe, whiles with entire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Affection I doe languish and expire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I, fonder then Cephisus foolish chyld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, having vewed in a fountaine shere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His face, was with the love thereof beguyld;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I, fonder, love a shade, the body far exyld.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Nought like,” (quoth shee) “for that same wretched boy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was of him selfe the ydle Paramoure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both love and lover, without hope of joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which he faded to a watry flowre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But better fortune thine, and better howre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which lov’st the shadow of a warlike knight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No shadow but a body hath in powre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That body, wheresoever that it light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May learned be by cyphers, or by Magicke might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But if thou may with reason yet represse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The growing evill, ere it strength have gott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thee abandond wholy do possesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against it strongly strive, and yield thee nott</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Til thou in open fielde adowne be smott:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if the passion mayster thy fraile might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that needs love or death must bee thy lott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, I avow to thee, by wrong or right</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To compas thy desire, and find that loved knight.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her chearefull words much cheard the feeble spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the sicke virgin, that her downe she layd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In her warme bed to sleepe, if that she might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the old-woman carefully displayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The clothes about her round with busy ayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that at last a litle creeping sleepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Surprisd her sence: Shee, therewith well apayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dronken lamp down in the oyl did steepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sett her by to watch, and sett her by to weepe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Earely, the morrow next, before that day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His joyous face did to the world revele,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They both uprose and tooke their ready way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the Church, their praiers to appele</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With great devotion, and with little zele:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the faire Damzel from the holy herse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her love-sicke hart to other thoughts did steale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that old Dame said many an idle verse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of her daughters hart fond fancies to reverse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Retourned home, the royall Infant fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into her former fitt; for-why no powre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor guidaunce of herselfe in her did dwell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But th’aged Nourse, her calling to her bowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had gathered Rew, and Savine, and the flowre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Camphora, and Calamint, and Dill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which she in a earthen Pot did poure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the brim with Coltwood did it fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many drops of milk and blood through it did spill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then, taking thrise three heares from off her head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them trebly breaded in a threefold lace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And round about the Pots mouth bound the thread;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, after having whispered a space</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Certein sad words with hollow voice and bace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee to the virgin sayd, thrise sayd she itt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Come daughter, come; come, spit upon my face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spitt thrise upon me, thrise upon me spitt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’uneven nomber for this busines is most fitt.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That sayd, her rownd about she from her turnd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She turned her contrary to the Sunne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrise she her turnd contrary, and returnd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All contrary; for she the right did shunne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever what she did was streight undonne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So thought she to undoe her daughters love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But love, that is in gentle brest begonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No ydle charmes so lightly may remove:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That well can witnesse who by tryall it does prove.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne ought it mote the noble Mayd avayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne slake the fury of her cruell flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that shee still did waste, and still did wayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, through long languour and hart-burning brame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She shortly like a pyned ghost became</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which long hath waited by the Stygian strond.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That when old Glaucè saw, for feare least blame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her miscarriage should in her be fond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She wist not how t’amend, nor how it to withstond.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-3" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Merlin bawrayes to Britomart</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The state of Artegall;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And shewes the famous Progeny</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Which from them springen shall.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Most sacred fyre, that burnest mightily</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In living brests, ykindled first above</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emongst th’eternall spheres and lamping sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thence pourd into men, which men call Love!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not that same, which doth base affections move</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In brutish mindes, and filthy lust inflame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that sweete fit that doth true beautie love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And choseth vertue for his dearest Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence spring all noble deedes and never dying fame:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Well did Antiquity a God thee deeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That over mortall mindes hast so great might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To order them as best to thee doth seeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all their actions to direct aright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fatall purpose of divine foresight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou doest effect in destined descents,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through deepe impression of thy secret might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stirredst up th’Heroës high intents,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which the late world admyres for wondrous moniments.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But thy dredd dartes in none doe triumph more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne braver proofe in any of thy powre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shewd’st thou, then in this royall Maid of yore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Making her seeke an unknowne Paramoure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the worlds end, through many a bitter stowre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whose two loynes thou afterwardes did rayse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most famous fruites of matrimoniall bowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which through the earth have spredd their living prayse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That fame in tromp of gold eternally displayes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Begin then, O my dearest sacred Dame!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Daughter of Phœbus and of Memorye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That doest ennoble with immortall name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The warlike Worthies, from antiquitye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In thy great volume of Eternitye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Begin, O Clio! and recount from hence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My glorious Soveraines goodly auncestrye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that by dew degrees, and long protense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou have it lastly brought unto her Excellence.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Full many wayes within her troubled mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Old Glaucè cast to cure this Ladies griefe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full many waies she sought, but none could find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor herbes, nor charmes, nor counsel, that is chiefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And choicest med’cine for sick harts reliefe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forthy great care she tooke, and greater feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least that it should her turne to fowle repriefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sore reproch, when so her father deare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should of his dearest daughters hard misfortune heare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last she her avisde, that he which made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That mirrhour, wherein the sicke Damosell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So straungely vewed her straunge lovers shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet, the learned Merlin, well could tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under what coast of heaven the man did dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by what means his love might best be wrought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, though beyond the Africk Ismael</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or th’Indian Peru he were, she thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him forth through infinite endevour to have sought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Forthwith them selves disguising both in straunge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And base atyre, that none might them bewray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Maridunum, that is now by chaunge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of name Cayr-Merdin cald, they tooke their way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There the wise Merlin whylome wont (they say)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make his wonne, low underneath the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In a deepe delve, farre from the vew of day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of no living wight he mote be found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When so he counseld with his sp rights encompast round.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, if thou ever happen that same way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To travell, go to see that dreadfull place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It is an hideous hollow cave (they say)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under a Rock that lyes a litle space</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the swift Barry, tombling downe apace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emongst the woody hilles of Dynevowre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But dare thou not, I charge, in any cace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To enter into that same balefull Bowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For feare the cruell Feendes should thee unwares devowre:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But standing high aloft low lay thine eare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there such ghastly noise of yron chaines</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And brasen Caudrons thou shalt rombling heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which thousand sprights with long enduring paines</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe tosse, that it will stonne thy feeble braines;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oftentimes great grones, and grievous stownds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When too huge toile and labour them constraines:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oftentimes loud strokes and ringing sowndes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From under that deepe Rock most horribly rebowndes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The cause, some say, is this: A litle whyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before that Merlin dyde, he did intend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A brasen wall in compas to compyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About Cairmardin, and did it commend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto these Sprights to bring to perfect end:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">During which worke the Lady of the Lake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom long he lov’d, for him in hast did send;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, thereby forst his workemen to forsake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Them bownd till his retourne their labour not to slake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In the meane time, through that false Ladies traine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He was surprisd, and buried under beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever to his worke returnd againe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nath’lesse those feends may not their work forbeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So greatly his commandement they feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But there doe toyle and traveile day and night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill that brasen wall they up doe reare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Merlin had in Magick more insight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then ever him before, or after, living wight:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For he by wordes could call out of the sky</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both Sunne and Moone, and make them him obav;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Land to sea, and sea to maineland dry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And darksom night he eke could turne to day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Huge hostes of men he could alone dismay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hostes of men of meanest thinges could frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When so him list his enimies to fray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to this day, for terror of his fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The feends do quake when any him to them does name.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, sooth, men say that he was not the sonne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of mortall Syre or other living wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wondrously begotten, and begonne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By false illusion of a guilefull Spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On a faire Lady Nonne, that whilome hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Matilda, daughter to Pubidius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who was the lord of Mathraval by right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And coosen unto king Ambrosius;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence he indued was with skill so merveilous.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They, here arriving, staid awhile without,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne durst adventure rashly in to wend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But of their first intent gan make new dout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For dread of daunger which it might portend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill the hardy Mayd (with love to frend)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First entering, the dreadfull Mage there fownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deepe busied bout worke of wondrous end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And writing straunge characters in the grownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With which the stubborne feendes he to his service bownd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He nought was moved at their entraunce bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For of their comming well he wist afore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet list them bid their businesse to unfold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if ought in this world in secrete store</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were from him hidden, or unknowne of yore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Glaucè thus: “Let not it thee offend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That we thus rashly through thy darksom dore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unwares have prest; for either fatall end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or other mightie cause, us two did hither send.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He bad tell on; And then she thus began.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Now have three Moones with borrowd brothers light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrise shined faire, and thrise seemd dim and wan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith a sore evill, which this virgin bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tormenteth and doth plonge in dolefull plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First rooting tooke; but what thing it mote bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or whence it sprong, I can not read aright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But this I read, that, but if remedee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou her afford, full shortly I her dead shall see.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith th’Enchaunter softly gan to smyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At her smooth speeches, weeting inly well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she to him dissembled womanish guyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to her said: “Beldame, by that ye tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More neede of leach-crafte hath your Damozell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then of my skill: who helpe may have elsewhere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In vaine seekes wonders out of Magick spell.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th’old woman wox half blanck those wordes to heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet was loth to let her purpose plaine appeare;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And to him said: “Yf any leaches skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or other learned meanes, could have redrest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This my deare daughters deepe engraffed ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Certes I should be loth thee to molest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But this sad evill, which doth her infest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth course of naturall cause farre exceed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And housed is within her hollow brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That either seemes some cursed witches deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or evill spright, that in her doth such torment breed.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The wisard could no lenger beare her bord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, brusting forth in laughter, to her sayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Glaucè, what needes this colourable word</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To cloke the cause that hath it selfe bewrayd?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ye, fayre Britomartis, thus arayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More hidden are then Sunne in cloudy vele;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom thy good fortune, having fate obayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath hither brought for succour to appele;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which the powres to thee are pleased to revele.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The doubtfull Mayd, seeing her selfe descryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was all abasht, and her pure yvory</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into a cleare Carnation suddeine dyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As fayre Aurora, rysing hastily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth by her blushing tell that she did lye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All night in old Tithonus frozen bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof she seemes ashamed inwardly:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But her olde Nourse was nought dishartened,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But vauntage made of that which Merlin had ared;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And sayd; “Sith then thou knowest all our griefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(For what doest not thou knowe?) of grace I pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pitty our playnt, and yield us meet reliefe.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that the Prophet still awhile did stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then his spirite thus gan foorth display:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Most noble Virgin, that by fatall lore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hast learn’d to love, let no whit thee dismay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hard beginne that meetes thee in the dore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with sharpe fits thy tender hart oppresseth sore:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“For so must all things excellent begin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke enrooted deepe must be that Tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose big embodied braunches shall not lin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till they to hevens hight forth stretched bee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For from thy wombe a famous Progenee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall spring out of the auncient Trojan blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which shall revive the sleeping memoree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of those same antique Peres, the hevens brood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which Greeke and Asian rivers stayned with their blood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Renowmed kings, and sacred Emperours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy fruitfull Ofspring, shall from thee descend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Brave Captaines, and most mighty warriours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shall their conquests through all lands extend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And their decayed kingdomes shall amend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The feeble Britons, broken with long warre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They shall upreare, and mightily defend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against their forren foe that commes from farre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till universall peace compound all civill jarre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“It was not, Britomart, thy wandring eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Glauncing unwares in charmed looking glas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the streight course of hevenly destiny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Led with eternall providence, that has</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Guyded thy glaunce, to bring his will to pas:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne is thy fate, ne is thy fortune ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To love the prowest knight that ever was.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore submit thy wayes unto his will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And doe by all dew meanes thy destiny fulfill.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But read,” (saide Glaucè) “thou Magitian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What meanes shall she out seeke, or what waies take?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How shall she know, how shall she finde the man?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or what needes her to toyle, sith fates can make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Way for themselves their purpose to pertake?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Merlin thus: “Indeede the fates are firme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And may not shrinck, though all the world do shake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet ought mens good endevours them confirme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And guyde the heavenly causes to their constant terme.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The man, whom heavens have ordaynd to bee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The spouse of Britomart, is Arthegall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He wonneth in the land of Fayeree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet is no Fary borne, ne sib at all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Elfes, but sprong of seed terrestriall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And whylome by false Faries stolne away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whyles yet in infant cradle he did crall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne other to himselfe is knowne this day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that he by an Elfe was gotten of a Fay:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But sooth he is the sonne of Gorloïs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And brother unto Cador, Cornish king;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for his warlike feates renowmed is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From where the day out of the sea doth spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill the closure of the Evening:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From thence him, firmely bound with faithfull band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To this his native soyle thou backe shalt bring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strongly to ayde his countrey to withstand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The powre of forreine Paynims which invade thy land.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Great ayd thereto his mighty puissaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dreaded name shall give in that sad day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where also proofe of thy prow valiaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou then shalt make, t’increase thy lover’s pray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long time ye both in armes shall beare great sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till thy wombes burden thee from them do call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his last fate him from thee take away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Too rathe cut off by practise criminall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of secrete foes, that him shall make in mischiefe fall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“With thee yet shall he leave, for memory</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his late puissaunce, his ymage dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That living him in all activity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To thee shall represent. He, from the head</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his coosen Constantius, without dread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall take the crowne that was his fathers right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therewith crowne himselfe in th’others stead:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then shall he issew forth with dreadfull might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against his Saxon foes in bloody field to fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Like as a Lyon that in drowsie cave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath long time slept, himselfe so shall he shake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And comming forth shall spred his banner brave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over the troubled South, that it shall make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The warlike Mertians for feare to quake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrise shall he fight with them, and twise shall win;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the third time shall fayre accordaunce make:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, if he then with victorie can lin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He shall his dayes with peace bring to his earthly In.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“His sonne, hight Vortipore, shall him succeede</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In kingdome, but not in felicity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet shall he long time warre with happy speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with great honour many batteills try;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But at the last to th’importunity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of froward fortune shall be forst to yield:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But his sonne Malgo shall full mightily</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Avenge his fathers losse with speare and shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his proud foes discomfit in victorious field.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Behold the man! and tell me, Britomart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If ay more goodly creature thou didst see?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How like a Gyaunt in each manly part</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beares he himselfe with portly majestee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That one of th’old Heroës seemes to bee!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He the six Islands, comprovinciall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In auncient times unto great Britainee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall to the same reduce, and to him call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their sondry kings to do their homage severall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“All which his sonne Careticus awhile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall well defend, and Saxons powre suppresse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill a straunger king, from unknowne soyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arriving, him with multitude oppresse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great Gormond, having with huge mightinesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ireland subdewd, and therein fixt his throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like a swift Otter, fell through emptinesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall overswim the sea, with many one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his Norveyses, to assist the Britons fone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“He in his furie all shall overronne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And holy Church with faithlesse handes deface,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That thy sad people, utterly fordonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall to the utmost mountaines fly apace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was never so great waste in any place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor so fowle outrage doen by living men;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all thy Citties they shall sacke and race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the greene grasse that groweth they shall bren,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That even the wilde beast shall dy in starved den.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Whiles thus thy Britons doe in languour pine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proud Etheldred shall from the North arise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Serving th’ambitious will of Augustine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, passing Dee, with hardy enterprise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall backe repulse the valiaunt Brockwell twise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Bangor with massacred Martyrs fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the third time shall rew his foolhardise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Cadwan, pittying his peoples ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall stoutly him defeat, and thousand Saxons kill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But after him, Cadwallin mightily</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On his sonne Edwin all those wrongs shall wreake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne shall availe the wicked sorcery</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of false Pellite his purposes to breake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But him shall slay, and on a gallowes bleak</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall give th’enchaunter his unhappy hire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then shall the Britons, late dismayd and weake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From their long vassalage gin to respire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on their Paynim foes avenge their ranckled ire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ne shall he yet his wrath so mitigate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till both the sonnes of Edwin he have slayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Offricke and Osricke, twinnes unfortunate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both slaine in battaile upon Layburne playne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Together with the king of Louthiane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hight Adin, and the king of Orkeny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both joynt partakers of their fatall payne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Penda, fearefull of like desteny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall yield him selfe his liegeman, and sweare fealty.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Him shall he make his fatall Instrument</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T’afflict the other Saxons unsubdewd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He marching forth with fury insolent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the good king Oswald, who indewd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With heavenly powre, and by Angels reskewd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Al holding crosses in their hands on hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall him defeate withouten blood imbrewd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which that field, for endlesse memory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall Hevenfield be cald to all posterity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Whereat Cadwallin wroth shall forth issew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And an huge hoste into Northumber lead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which he godly Oswald shall subdew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And crowne with martiredome his sacred head:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose brother Oswin, daunted with like dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With price of silver shall his kingdome buy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Penda, seeking him adowne to tread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall tread adowne, and doe him fowly dye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But shall with guifts his Lord Cadwallin pacify.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Then shall Cadwallin die; and then the raine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Britons eke with him attonce shall dye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne shall the good Cadwallader, with paine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or powre, be hable it to remedy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When the full time, prefixt by destiny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shal be expird of Britons regiment:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For heven it selfe shall their successe envy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And them with plagues and murrins pestilent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Consume, till all their warlike puissaunce be spent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Yet after all these sorrowes, and huge hills</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of dying people, during eight yeares space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cadwallader, not yielding to his ills,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From Armoricke, where long in wretched cace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He liv’d, retourning to his native place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shal be by vision staide from his intent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For th’heavens have decreëd to displace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Britons for their sinnes dew punishment</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the Saxons over-give their government.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Then woe, and woe, and everlasting woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be to the Briton babe that shal be borne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To live in thraldome of his fathers foe!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Late king, now captive; late lord, now forlorne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The worlds reproch; the cruell victors scorne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Banisht from princely bowre to wastefull wood!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O! who shal helpe me to lament and mourne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The royall seed, the antique Trojan blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose empire lenger here then ever any stood?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Damzell was full deepe empassioned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both for his griefe, and for her peoples sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose future woes so plaine he fashioned;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, sighing sore, at length him thus bespake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Ah! but will hevens fury never slake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor vengeaunce huge relent it selfe at last?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will not long misery late mercy make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But shall their name for ever be defaste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And quite from off the earth their memory be raste?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Nay but the terme” (sayd he) “is limited,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in this thraldome Britons shall abide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the just revolution measured</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they as Straungers shal be notifide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For twise fowre hundreth yeares shalbe supplide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere they to former rule restor’d shal bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And their importune fates all satisfide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, during this their most obscuritee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their beames shall ofte breake forth, that men them faire may see.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“For Rhodoricke, whose surname shal be Great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall of him selfe a brave ensample shew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Saxon kinges his friendship shall intreat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Howell Dha shall goodly well indew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The salvage minds with skill of just and trew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Griffyth Conan also shall upreare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His dreaded head, and the old sparkes renew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of native corage, that his foes shall feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Least back againe the kingdom he from them should beare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ne shall the Saxons selves all peaceably</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enjoy the crowne, which they from Britons wonne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First ill, and after ruled wickedly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, ere two hundred yeares be full outronne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There shall a Raven, far from rising Sunne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his wide wings upon them fiercely fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bid his faithlesse chickens overronne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fruitfull plaines, and with fell cruelty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In their avenge tread downe the victors surquedry.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Yet shall a third both these and thine subdew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There shall a Lion from the sea-bord wood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Neustria come roring, with a crew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of hungry whelpes, his battailous bold brood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose clawes were newly dipt in cruddy blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from the Daniske Tyrants head shall rend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th’usurped crowne, as if that he were wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the spoile of the countrey conquered</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Emongst his young ones shall divide with bountyhed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Tho, when the terme is full accomplishid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There shall a sparke of fire, which hath long-while</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bene in his ashes raked up and hid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bee freshly kindled in the fruitfull Ile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Mona, where it lurked in exile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which shall breake forth into bright burning flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And reach into the house that beares the stile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of roiall majesty and soveraine name:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So shall the Briton blood their crowne agayn reclame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thenceforth eternall union shall be made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Betweene the nations different afore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sacred Peace shall lovingly persuade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The warlike minds to learne her goodly lore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And civile armes to exercise no more:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then shall a royall Virgin raine, which shall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stretch her white rod over the Belgicke shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the great Castle smite so sore withall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it shall make him shake, and shortly learn to fall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But yet the end is not.”⁠—There Merlin stayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As overcomen of the spirites powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or other ghastly spectacle dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That secretly he saw, yet note discoure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which suddein fitt, and halfe extatick stoure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When the two fearefull wemen saw, they grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Greatly confused in behaveoure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last, the fury past, to former hew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hee turnd againe, and chearfull looks as earst did shew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then, when them selves they well instructed had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all that needed them to be inquird,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They both, conceiving hope of comfort glad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With lighter hearts unto their home retird;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where they in secret counsell close conspird,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How to effect so hard an enterprize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to possesse the purpose they desird:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now this, now that, twixt them they did devize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And diverse plots did frame to maske in strange disguise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last the Nourse in her foolhardy wit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Conceiv’d a bold devise, and thus bespake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Daughter, I deeme that counsel aye most fit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of the time doth dew advauntage take.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye see that good king Uther now doth make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strong warre upon the Paynim brethren, hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Octa and Oza, whome hee lately brake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beside Cayr Verolame in victorious fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That now all Britany doth burne in armes bright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“That, therefore, nought our passage may empeach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let us in feigned armes our selves disguize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And our weake hands (need makes good schollers) teach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dreadful speare and shield to exercize:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne certes, daughter, that same warlike wize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I weene, would you misseeme; for ye beene tall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And large of limbe t’atchieve an hard emprize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought ye want but skil, which practize small</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wil bring, and shortly make you a mayd Martiall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And, sooth, it ought your corage much inflame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To heare so often, in that royall hous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whence, to none inferior, ye came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bards tell of many wemen valorous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which have full many feats adventurous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Performd, in paragone of proudest men:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bold Bunduca, whose victorious</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Exployts made Rome to quake; stout Guendolen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Renowmed Martia; and redoubted Emmilen.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And, that which more then all the rest may sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Late dayes ensample, which these eyes beheld:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the last field before Menevia,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Uther with those forrein Pagans held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I saw a Saxon Virgin, the which feld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great Ulfin thrise upon the bloody playne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, had not Carados her hand withheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From rash revenge, she had him surely slayne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet Carados himselfe from her escapt with payne.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ah! read,” (quoth Britomart) “how is she hight?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Fayre Angela” (quoth she) “men do her call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No whit lesse fayre then terrible in fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She hath the leading of a Martiall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mightie people, dreaded more then all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other Saxons, which doe, for her sake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And love, themselves of her name <em>Angles</em> call.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore, faire Infant, her ensample make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto thy selfe, and equall corage to thee take.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her harty wordes so deepe into the mynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the yong Damzell sunke, that great desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of warlike armes in her forthwith they tynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And generous stout courage did inspyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she resolv’d, unweeting to her Syre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Advent’rous knighthood on her selfe to don;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And counseld with her Nourse her Maides attyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To turne into a massy habergeon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bad her all things put in readinesse anon.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Th’old woman nought that needed did omit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all thinges did conveniently purvay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It fortuned (so time their turne did fitt)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A band of Britons, ryding on forray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Few dayes before, had gotten a great pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Saxon goods; emongst the which was seene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A goodly Armour, and full rich aray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which long’d to Angela, the Saxon Queene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All fretted round with gold, and goodly wel beseene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The same, with all the other ornaments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">King Ryence caused to be hanged hy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his chiefe Church, for endlesse moniments</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his successe and gladfull victory:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which her selfe avising readily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In th’evening late old Glaucè thither led</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Britomart, and, that same Armory</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Downe taking, her therein appareled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well as she might, and with brave bauldrick garnished.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Beside those armes there stood a mightie speare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Bladud made by Magick art of yore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And usd the same in batteill aye to beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith which it had beene here preserv’d in store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For his great virtues proved long afore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For never wight so fast in sell could sit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But him perforce unto the ground it bore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both speare she tooke and shield which hong by it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both speare and shield of great powre, for her purpose fit.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus when she had the virgin all arayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another harnesse which did hang thereby</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About her selfe she dight, that the yong Mayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She might in equall armes accompany,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as her Squyre attend her carefully.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho to their ready Steedes they clombe full light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through back waies, that none might them espy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Covered with secret cloud of silent night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Themselves they forth convaid, and passed forward right.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne rested they, till that to Faery lond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They came, as Merlin them directed late:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where, meeting with this Redcrosse Knight, she fond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of diverse thinges discourses to dilate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But most of Arthegall and his estate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last their wayes so fell, that they mote part:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then each to other, well affectionate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Friendship professed with unfained hart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Redcrosse Knight diverst, but forth rode Britomart.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-4" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Bold Marinell of Britomart</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Is throwne in the Rich strond:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Faire Florimell of Arthur is</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Long followed, but not fond.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Where is the Antique glory now become,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That whylome wont in wemen to appeare?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where be the brave atchievements doen by some?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where be the battels, where the shield and speare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the conquests which them high did reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That matter made for famous Poets verse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And boastfull men so oft abasht to heare?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beene they all dead, and laide in dolefull herse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or doen they onely sleepe, and shall againe reverse?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>If they be dead, then woe is me therefore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if they sleepe, O let them soone awake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all too long I burne with envy sore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To heare the warlike feates, which Homere spake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of bold Penthesilee, which made a lake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Greekish blood so oft in Trojan plaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when I reade, how stout Debora strake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proud Sisera, and how Camill’ hath slaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The huge Orsilochus, I swell with great disdaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet these, and all that els had puissaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cannot with noble Britomart compare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As well for glorie of great valiaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As for pure chastitee and vertue rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all her goodly deedes doe well declare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well worthie stock, from which the branches sprong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in late yeares so faire a blossome bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As thee, O Queene! the matter of my song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose lignage from this Lady I derive along.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who when, through speaches with the Redcrosse Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She learned had th’estate of Arthegall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in each point her selfe informd aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A friendly league of love perpetuall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She with him bound, and Congé tooke withall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then he forth on his journey did proceede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke adventures which mote him befall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And win him worship through his warlike deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which alwaies of his paines he made the chiefest meed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Britomart kept on her former course,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever dofte her armes, but all the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Grew pensive through that amarous discourse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which the Redcrosse knight did earst display</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her lovers shape, and chevalrous aray:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A thousand thoughts she fashiond in her mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in her feigning fancie did pourtray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him such as fittest she for love could find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wise, warlike, personable, courteous, and kind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With such selfe-pleasing thoughts her wound she fed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thought so to beguile her grievous smart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But so her smart was much more grievous bred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the deepe wound more deep engord her hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nought but death her dolour mote depart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So forth she rode, without repose or rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Searching all lands and each remotest part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Following the guydance of her blinded guest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till that to the sea-coast at length she her addrest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There she alighted from her light-foot beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sitting downe upon the rocky shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Badd her old Squyre unlace her lofty creast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho having vewd awhile the surges hore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That gainst the craggy clifts did loudly rore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in their raging surquedry disdaynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the fast earth affronted them so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And their devouring covetize restraynd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereat she sighed deepe, and after thus complaynd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Huge sea of sorrow and tempestuous griefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein my feeble barke is tossed long</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far from the hoped haven of reliefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why doe thy cruel billowes beat so strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thy moyst mountaines each on others throng,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Threatning to swallow up my fearefull lyfe?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O! doe thy cruell wrath and spightfull wrong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At length allay, and stint thy stormy strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which in thy troubled bowels raignes and rageth ryfe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“For els my feeble vessell, crazd and crackt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through thy strong buffets and outrageous blowes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cannot endure, but needes it must be wrackt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On the rough rocks, or on the sandy shallowes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles that love it steres, and fortune rowes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Love, my lewd Pilott, hath a restlesse minde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fortune, Boteswaine, no assurance knowes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But saile withouten starres gainst tyde and winde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How can they other doe, sith both are bold and blinde?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thou God of windes, that raignest in the seas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That raignest also in the Continent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last blow up some gentle gale of ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which may bring my ship, ere it be rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the gladsome port of her intent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, when I shall my selfe in safety see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A table, for eternall moniment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of thy great grace and my great jeopardee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great Neptune, I avow to hallow unto thee!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then sighing softly sore, and inly deepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She shut up all her plaint in privy griefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For her great courage would not let her weepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that old Glaucè gan with sharpe repriefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her to restraine, and give her good reliefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through hope of those, which Merlin had her told</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should of her name and nation be chiefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fetch their being from the sacred mould</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of her immortall womb, to be in heaven enrold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus as she her recomforted, she spyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where far away one, all in armour bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hasty gallop towards her did ryde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her dolour soone she ceast, and on her dight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her Helmet, to her Courser mounting light:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her former sorrow into suddein wrath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both coosen passions of distroubled spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Converting, forth she beates the dusty path:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love and despight attonce her courage kindled hath.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As, when a foggy mist hath overcast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The face of heven, and the cleare ayre engroste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The world in darkenes dwels; till that at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The watry Southwinde, from the seabord coste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upblowing, doth disperse the vapour lo’ste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And poures it selfe forth in a stormy showre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So the fayre Britomart, having disclo’ste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her clowdy care into a wrathfull stowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mist of griefe dissolv’d did into vengeance powre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones, her goodly shield addressing fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That mortall speare she in her hand did take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto battaill did her selfe prepayre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The knight, approching, sternely her bespake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Sir knight, that doest thy voyage rashly make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By this forbidden way in my despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne doest by others death ensample take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I read thee soone retyre, whiles thou hast might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Least afterwards it be too late to take thy flight.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ythrild with deepe disdaine of his proud threat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She shortly thus: “Fly they, that need to fly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wordes fearen babes. I meane not thee entreat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To passe, but maugre thee will passe or dy.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne lenger stayd for th’other to reply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with sharpe speare the rest made dearly knowne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strongly the straunge knight ran, and sturdily</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strooke her full on the brest, that made her downe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Decline her head, and touch her crouper with her crown.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But she againe him in the shield did smite</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With so fierce furie and great puissaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, through his three-square scuchin percing quite</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through his mayled hauberque, by mischaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wicked steele through his left side did glaunce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him so transfixed she before her bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beyond his croupe, the length of all her launce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till, sadly soucing on the sandy shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He tombled on an heape, and wallowd in his gore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like as the sacred Oxe that carelesse stands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With gilden hornes and flowry girlonds crownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proud of his dying honor and deare bandes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles th’altars fume with frankincense arownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All suddeinly, with mortall stroke astownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth groveling fall, and with his streaming gore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Distaines the pillours and the holy grownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the faire flowres that decked him afore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So fell proud Marinell upon the pretious shore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The martiall Mayd stayd not him to lament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But forward rode, and kept her ready way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Along the strond; which, as she over-went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She saw bestrowed all with rich aray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of pearles and pretious stones of great assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the gravell mixt with golden owre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat she wondred much, but would not stay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For gold, or perles, or pretious stones, an howre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But them despised all; for all was in her powre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whiles thus he lay in deadly stonishment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tydings hereof came to his mothers eare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mother was the blacke-browd Cymoënt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The daughter of great Nereus, which did beare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This warlike sonne unto an earthly peare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The famous Dumarin; who, on a day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Finding the Nymph asleepe in secret wheare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he by chaunce did wander that same way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was taken with her love, and by her closely lay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There he this knight of her begot, whom borne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She, of his father, Marinell did name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in a rocky cave, as wight forlorne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long time she fostred up, till he became</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A mighty man at armes, and mickle fame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did get through great adventures by him donne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For never man he suffred by that same</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rich strond to travell, whereas he did wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that he must do battail with the Sea-nymphes sonne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>An hundred knights of honorable name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He had subdew’d, and them his vassals made;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That through all Faerie lond his noble fame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now blazed was, and feare did all invade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none durst passen through that perilous glade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to advaunce his name and glory more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her Sea-god syre she dearely did perswade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T’endow her sonne with threasure and rich store</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bove all the sonnes that were of earthly wombes ybore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The God did graunt his daughters deare demaund,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To doen his Nephew in all riches flow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones his heaped waves he did commaund</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of their hollow bosome forth to throw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All the huge threasure, which the sea below</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had in his greedy gulfe devoured deepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him enriched through the overthrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wreckes of many wretches, which did weepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And often wayle their wealth, which he from them did keepe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Shortly upon that shore there heaped was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Exceeding riches and all pretious things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The spoyle of all the world; that it did pas</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wealth of th’East, and pompe of Persian kings:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gold, amber, yvorie, perles, owches, rings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all that els was pretious and deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sea unto him voluntary brings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shortly he a great Lord did appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As was in all the lond of Faery, or else wheare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereto he was a doughty dreaded knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tryde often to the scath of many Deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none in equall armes him matchen might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which his mother seeing gan to feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least his too haughtie hardines might reare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some hard mishap in hazard of his life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forthy she oft him counseld to forbeare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bloody batteill and to stirre up strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But after all his warre to rest his wearie knife.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, for his more assuraunce, she inquir’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One day of Proteus by his mighty spell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(For Proteus was with prophecy inspir’d)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her deare sonnes destiny to her to tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the sad end of her sweet Marinell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, through foresight of his eternall skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bad her from womankind to keepe him well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For of a woman he should have much ill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A virgin straunge and stout him should dismay or kill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Forthy she gave him warning every day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The love of women not to entertaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A lesson too too hard for living clay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From love in course of nature to refraine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet he his mothers lore did well retaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever from fayre Ladies love did fly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet many Ladies fayre did oft complaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they for love of him would algates dy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dy, who so list for him, he was loves enimy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But ah! who can deceive his destiny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or weene by warning to avoyd his fate?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, when he sleepes in most security</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And safest seemes, him soonest doth amate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And findeth dew effect or soone or late;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So feeble is the powre of fleshly arme.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mother bad him wemens love to hate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she of womans force did feare no harme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, weening to have arm’d him, she did quite disarme.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This was that woman, this that deadly wownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Proteus prophecide should him dismay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which his mother vainely did expownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be hart-wownding love, which should assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bring her sonne unto his last decay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So tide be the termes of mortall state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And full of subtile sophismes, which do play</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With double senses, and with false debate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>T’approve the unknowen purpose of eternall fate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Too trew the famous Marinell it fownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, through late triall, on that wealthy Strond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Inglorious now lies in sencelesse swownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through heavy stroke of Britomartis hond.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when his mother deare did understond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heavy tydings heard, whereas she playd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst her watry sisters by a pond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gathering sweete daffadillyes, to have made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gay girlonds from the Sun their forheads faire to shade;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftesoones both flowres and girlonds far away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee flong, and her faire deawy lockes yrent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sorrow huge she turnd her former play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gamesom merth to grievous dreriment:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee threw her selfe downe on the Continent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne word did speake, but lay as in a swowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles all her sisters did for her lament</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With yelling outcries, and with shrieking sowne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every one did teare her girlond from her crowne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as shee up out of her deadly fitt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arose, shee bad her charett to be brought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all her sisters that with her did sitt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bad eke attonce their charetts to be sought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, full of bitter griefe and pensife thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She to her wagon clombe; clombe all the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And forth together went with sorow fraught.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The waves, obedient to theyr beheast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Them yielded ready passage, and their rage surceast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Great Neptune stoode amazed at their sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles on his broad rownd backe they softly slid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke him selfe mournd at their mournful plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet wist not what their wailing ment; yet did,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For great compassion of their sorow, bid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mighty waters to them buxome bee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftesoones the roaring billowes still abid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the griesly Monsters of the See</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood gaping at their gate, and wondred them to see.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A teme of Dolphins raunged in aray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drew the smooth charett of sad Cymoent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They were all taught by Triton to obay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the long raynes at her commaundement:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As swifte as swallowes on the waves they went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That their brode flaggy finnes no fome did reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne bubling rowndell they behinde them sent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rest, of other fishes drawen weare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which with their finny oars the swelling sea did sheare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as they bene arriv’d upon the brim</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the Rich Strond, their charets they forlore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And let their temed fishes softly swim</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Along the margent of the fomy shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least they their finnes should bruze, and surbate sore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their tender feete upon the stony grownd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And comming to the place, where all in gore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cruddy blood enwallowed they fownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lucklesse Marinell lying in deadly swownd,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His mother swowned thrise, and the third time</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could scarce recovered bee out of her paine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had she not beene devoide of mortall slime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee should not then have bene relyv’d againe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, soone as life recovered had the raine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee made so piteous mone and deare wayment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the hard rocks could scarse from tears refraine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all her sister Nymphes with one consent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Supplide her sobbing breaches with sad complement.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Deare image of my selfe,” (she sayd) “that is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wretched sonne of wretched mother borne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is this thine high advauncement? O! is this</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th’immortall name, with which thee, yet unborne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy Grandsire Nereus promist to adorne?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now lyest thou of life and honor refte;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now lyest thou a lumpe of earth forlorne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne of thy late life memory is lefte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne can thy irrevocable desteny bee wefte.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Fond Proteus, father of false prophecis!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And they more fond that credit to thee give!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not this the worke of womans hand ywis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That so deepe wound through these deare members drive.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I feared love; but they that love doe live,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But they that dye doe nether love nor hate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nath’lesse to thee thy folly I forgive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to my selfe, and to accursed fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The guilt I doe ascribe: deare wisedom bought too late!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O! what availes it of immortall seed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To beene ybredd and never borne to dye?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Farre better I it deeme to die with speed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then waste in woe and waylfull miserye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who dyes, the utmost dolor doth abye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But who that lives is lefte to waile his losse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So life is losse, and death felicity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sad life worse then glad death; and greater crosse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see frends grave, then dead the grave self to engrosse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But if the heavens did his dayes envie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And my short blis maligne, yet mote they will</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus much afford me, ere that he did die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the dim eies of my deare Marinell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I mote that close, and him bed farewell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith other offices for mother meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They would nor graunt⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, maulgre them, farewell, my sweetest sweet!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Farewell, my sweetest sonne, sith we no more shall meet!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus when they all had sorowed their fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They softly gan to search his griesly wownd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, that they might him handle more at will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They him disarmd; and, spredding on the grownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their watchet mantles fridgd with silver rownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They softly wipt away the gelly blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From th’orifice; which having well upbownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They pourd in soveraine balme and Nectar good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good both for erthly med’cine and for hevenly food.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho when the lilly handed liagore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(This Liagore whilome had learned skill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In leaches craft, by great Apolloes lore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith her whilome upon high Pindus hill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He loved, and at last her wombe did fill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hevenly seed, whereof wise Pæon sprong)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did feele his pulse, she knew there staied still</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some litle life his feeble sprites emong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which to his mother told, despeire she from her flong.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho, up him taking in their tender hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They easely unto her charett beare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her teme at her commaundement quiet stands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles they the corse into her wagon reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strowe with flowres the lamentable beare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then all the rest into their coches clim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through the brackish waves their passage sheare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon great Neptunes necke they softly swim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to her watry chamber swiftly carry him.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Deepe in the bottome of the sea her bowre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is built of hollow billowes heaped hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to thicke clouds that threat a stormy showre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And vauted all within, like to the Skye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which the Gods doe dwell eternally;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There they him laide in easy couch well dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sent in haste for Tryphon, to apply</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Salves to his wounds, and medicines of might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Tryphon of sea gods the soveraine leach is hight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The whiles the Nymphes sit all about him rownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lamenting his mishap and heavy plight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ofte his mother, vewing his wide wownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cursed the hand that did so deadly smight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her dearest sonne, her dearest harts delight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But none of all those curses overtooke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The warlike Maid, th’ensample of that might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But fairely well shee thryv’d, and well did brooke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her noble deeds, ne her right course for ought forsooke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet did false Archimage her still pursew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bring to passe his mischievous intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now that he had her singled from the crew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of courteous knights, the Prince and Faery gent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom late in chace of beauty excellent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee lefte, pursewing that same foster strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whose fowle outrage they impatient,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And full of firy zele, him followed long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To reskew her from shame, and to revenge her wrong.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Through thick and thin, through mountains and through playns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those two great champions did attonce pursew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fearefull damzell with incessant payns;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who from them fled, as light-foot hare from vew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of hunter swifte and sent of howndes trew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last they came unto a double way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where, doubtfull which to take, her to reskew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Themselves they did dispart, each to assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether more happy were to win so goodly pray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Timias, the Princes gentle Squyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Ladies love unto his Lord forlent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with proud envy and indignant yre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After that wicked foster fiercely went:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So beene they three three sondry wayes ybent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But fayrest fortune to the Prince befell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose chaunce it was, that soone he did repent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To take that way in which that Damozell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was fledd afore, affraid of him as feend of hell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last of her far off he gained vew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan he freshly pricke his fomy steed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever as he nigher to her drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So evermore he did increase his speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of each turning still kept wary heed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alowd to her he oftentimes did call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To doe away vaine doubt and needlesse dreed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full myld to her he spake, and oft let fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many meeke wordes to stay and comfort her withall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But nothing might relent her hasty flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So deepe the deadly feare of that foule swaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was earst impressed in her gentle spright.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as a fearefull Dove, which through the raine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the wide ayre her way does cut amaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having farre off espyde a Tassell gent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which after her his nimble winges doth straine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doubleth her hast for feare to bee for-hent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with her pineons cleaves the liquid firmament.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With no lesse hast, and eke with no lesse dreed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That fearefull Ladie fledd from him, that ment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To her no evill thought nor evill deed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet former feare of being fowly shent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Carried her forward with her first intent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And though, oft looking backward, well she vewde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her selfe freed from that foster insolent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that it was a knight which now her sewde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet she no lesse the knight feard then that villein rude.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His uncouth shield and straunge armes her dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose like in Faery lond were seldom seene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That fast she from him fledd, no lesse afrayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then of wilde beastes if she had chased beene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet he her followd still with corage keene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So long, that now the golden Hesperus</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was mounted high in top of heaven sheene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And warnd his other brethren joyeous</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To light their blessed lamps in Joves eternall hous.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All suddeinly dim wox the dampish ayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And griesly shadowes covered heaven bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That now with thousand starres was decked fayre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when the Prince beheld, a lothfull sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that perforce, for want of lenger light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He mote surceasse his suit, and lose the hope</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his long labour, he gan fowly wyte</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His wicked fortune that had turnd aslope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cursed night that reft from him so goodly scope.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho, when her wayes he could no more descry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to and fro at disaventure strayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as a ship, whose Lodestar suddeinly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Covered with cloudes her Pilott hath dismayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His wearisome pursuit perforce he stayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from his loftie steed dismounting low</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did let him forage. Downe himselfe he layd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the grassy ground to sleepe a throw:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cold earth was his couch, the hard steele his pillow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But gentle Sleepe envyde him any rest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In stead thereof sad sorow and disdaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his hard hap did vexe his noble brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thousand Fancies bett his ydle brayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With their light wings, the sights of semblants vaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oft did he wish that Lady faire mote bee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His Faery Queene, for whom he did complaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that his Faery Queene were such as shee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ever hasty Night be blamed bitterlie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Night! thou foule Mother of annoyaunce sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sister of heavie death, and nourse of woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which wast begot in heaven, but for thy bad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And brutish shape thrust downe to hell below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where, by the grim floud of Cocytus slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy dwelling is in Herebus black hous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Black Herebus, thy husband, is the foe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the Gods,) where thou ungratious</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Halfe of thy dayes doest lead in horrour hideous.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“What had th’eternall Maker need of thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The world in his continuall course to keepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That doest all thinges deface, ne lettest see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The beautie of his worke? Indeed, in sleepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The slouthfull body that doth love to steepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His lustlesse limbes, and drowne his baser mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth praise thee oft, and oft from Stygian deepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Calles thee his goddesse, in his errour blind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And great Dame Natures handmaide chearing every kind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But well I wote, that to an heavy hart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou art the roote and nourse of bitter cares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Breeder of new, renewer of old smarts:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Instead of rest thou lendest rayling teares;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Instead of sleepe thou sendest troublous feares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dreadfull visions, in the which alive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dreary image of sad death appeares:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So from the wearie spirit thou doest drive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Desired rest, and men of happinesse deprive.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Under thy mantle black there hidden lye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Light-shonning thefte, and traiterous intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abhorred bloodshed, and vile felony,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shamefull deceipt, and daunger imminent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fowle horror, and eke hellish dreriment:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All these, I wote, in thy protection bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And light doe shonne for feare of being shent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For light ylike is loth’d of them and thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all that lewdnesse love doe hate the light to see.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“For day discovers all dishonest wayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sheweth each thing as it is in deed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The prayses of high God he faire displayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his large bountie rightly doth areed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dayes dearest children be the blessed seed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which darknesse shall subdue and heaven win:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Truth is his daughter; he her first did breed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most sacred virgin without spot of sinne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our life is day, but death with darknesse doth begin.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O! when will day then turne to me againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bring with him his long expected light?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O Titan! hast to reare thy joyous waine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Speed thee to spred abroad thy beames bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chace away this too long lingring night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Chace her away, from whence she came, to hell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She, she it is, that hath me done despight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There let her with the damned spirits dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yield her rowme to day that can it governe well.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus did the Prince that wearie night outweare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In restlesse anguish and unquiet paine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And earely, ere the morrow did upreare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His deawy head out of the Ocean maine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He up arose, as halfe in great disdaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And clombe unto his steed. So forth he went</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With heavy look and lumpish pace, that plaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In him bewraid great grudge and maltalent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His steed eke seemd t’apply his steps to his intent.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-5" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Prince Arthur heares of Florimell:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Three fosters Timias wounds;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Belphebe finds him alost dead.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And reareth out of sownd.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Wonder it is to see, in diverse minds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How diversly love doth his pageants play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shewes his powre in variable kinds:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The baser wit, whose idle thoughts alway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are wont to cleave unto the lowly clay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It stirreth up to sensuall desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in lewd slouth to wast his carelesse day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in brave sprite it kindles goodly fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That to all high desert and honour doth aspire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne suffereth it uncomely idlenesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his free thought to build her sluggish nest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne suffereth it thought of ungentlenesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ever to creepe into his noble brest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to the highest and the worthiest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lifteth it up that els would lowly fall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It lettes not fall, it lettes it not to rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It lettes not scarse this Prince to breath at all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to his first poursuit him forward still doth call.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who long time wandred through the forest wyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To finde some issue thence, till that at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He met a Dwarfe, that seemed terrifyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With some late perill which he hardly past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or other accident, which him aghast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whom he asked, whence he lately came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And whither now he travelled so fast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For sore he swat, and, running through that same</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thicke forest, was bescracht, and both his feet nigh lame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Panting for breath, and almost out of hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Dwarfe him answerd; “Sir, ill mote I stay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tell the same: I lately did depart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From Faery court, where I have many a day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Served a gentle Lady of great sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And high accompt through out all Elfin land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who lately left the same, and tooke this way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her now I seeke; and if ye understand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which way she fared hath, good Sir, tell out of hand.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“What mister wight,” (saide he) “and how arayd?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Royally clad” (quoth he) “in cloth of gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As meetest may beseeme a noble mayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her faire lockes in rich circlet be enrold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A fayrer wight did never Sunne behold?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on a Palfrey rydes more white then snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet she her selfe is whiter manifold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The surest signe, whereby ye may her know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is that she is the fairest wight alive, I trow.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Now certes, swaine,” (saide he) “such one, I weene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fast flying through this forest from her fo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A foule ill-favoured foster, I have seene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her selfe, well as I might, I reskewd tho,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But could not stay, so fast she did foregoe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Carried away with wings of speedy feare.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Ah, dearest God!” (quoth he) “that is great woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wondrous ruth to all that shall it heare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But can ye read, Sir, how I may her finde, or where?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Perdy, me lever were to weeten that,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Said he) “then ransome of the richest knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or all the good that ever yet I gat:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But froward fortune, and too forward Night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such happinesse did, maulgre, to me spight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fro me reft both life and light attone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, Dwarfe, aread what is that Lady bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That through this forrest wandreth thus alone?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For of her errour straunge I have great ruth and mone.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“That Lady is,” (quoth he) “where so she bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bountiest virgin and most debonaire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ever living eye, I weene, did see.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lives none this day that may with her compare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In stedfast chastitie and vertue rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The goodly ornaments of beautie bright;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And is ycleped Florimell the faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Florimell belov’d of many a knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet she loves none but one, that Marinell is hight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“A Sea-nymphes sonne, that Marinell is hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of my deare Dame is loved dearely well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In other none, but him, she sets delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All her delight is set on Marinell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he sets nought at all by Florimell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Ladies love his mother long ygoe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did him, they say, forwarne through sacred spell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But fame now flies, that of a forreine foe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He is yslaine, which is the ground of all our woe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Five dayes there be since he (they say) was slaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And foure since Florimell the Court forwent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And vowed never to returne againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till him alive or dead she did invent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore, faire Sir, for love of knighthood gent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And honour of trew Ladies, if ye may</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By your good counsell, or bold hardiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or succour her, or me direct the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do one or other good, I you most humbly pray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“So may ye gaine to you full great renowme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all good Ladies through the worlde so wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And haply in her hart find highest rowme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whom ye seeke to be most magnifide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At least eternall meede shall you abide.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom the Prince: “Dwarfe, comfort to thee take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, till thou tidings learne what her betide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I here avow thee never to forsake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ill weares he armes, that nill them use for Ladies sake.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So with the Dwarfe he backe retourn’d againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke his Lady, where he mote her find;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by the way he greatly gan complaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The want of his good Squire late lefte behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For whom he wondrous pensive grew in mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For doubt of daunger which mote him betide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For him he loved above all mankinde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having him trew and faithfull ever tride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bold, as ever Squire that waited by knights side:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who all this while full hardly was assayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of deadly daunger, which to him betid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, whiles his Lord pursewd that noble Mayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After that foster fowle he fiercely rid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bene avenged of the shame he did</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To that faire Damzell: Him he chaced long</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through the thicke woods, wherein he would have hid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His shamefull head from his avengement strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And oft him threatned death for his outrageous wrong.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nathlesse the villein sped himselfe so well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether through swiftnesse of his speedy beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or knowledge of those woods where he did dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shortly he from daunger was releast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And out of sight escaped at the least:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet not escaped from the dew reward</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his bad deedes, which daily he increast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ceased not, till him oppressed hard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The heavy plague that for such leachours is prepard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For soone as he was vanisht out of sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His coward courage gan emboldned bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cast t’avenge him of that fowle despight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he had borne of his bold enimee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho to his brethren came, for they were three</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ungratious children of one gracelesse sire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto them complained how that he</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had used beene of that foolehardy Squire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So them with bitter words he stird to bloody ire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Forthwith themselves with their sad instruments</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of spoyle and murder they gan arme bylive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with him forth into the forrest went</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wreake the wrath, which he did earst revive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In their sterne brests, on him which late did drive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their brother to reproch and shamefull flight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For they had vow’d that never he alive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of that forest should escape their might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vile rancour their rude harts had fild with such despight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Within that wood there was a covert glade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Foreby a narrow foord, to them well knowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through which it was uneath for wight to wade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now by fortune it was overflowne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By that same way they knew that Squyre unknowne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mote algates passe: forthy themselves they set</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There in await, with thicke woods overgrowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the while their malice they did whet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With cruell threats his passage through the ford to let.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It fortuned, as they devised had:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gentle Squire came ryding that same way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unweeting of their wile and treason bad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through the ford to passen did assay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that fierce foster, which late fled away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stoutly foorth stepping on the further shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him boldly bad his passage there to stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till he had made amends, and full restore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all the damage which he had him doen afore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that at him a quiv’ring dart he threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With so fell force, and villeinous despite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That through his haberjeon the forkehead flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through the linked mayles empierced quite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But had no powre in his soft flesh to bite.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That stroke the hardy Squire did sore displease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But more that him he could not come to smite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For by no meanes the high banke he could sease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But labour’d long in that deepe ford with vaine disease.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And still the foster with his long bore-speare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him kept from landing at his wished will.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Anone one sent out of the thicket neare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A cruell shaft, headed with deadly ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fethered with an unlucky quill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wicked steele stayd not till it did light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his left thigh, and deepely did it thrill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Exceeding griefe that wound in him empight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But more that with his foes he could not come to fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last, through wrath and vengeaunce making way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He on the bancke arryvd with mickle payne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where the third brother him did sore assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And drove at him with all his might and mayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A forest-bill, which both his hands did strayne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But warily he did avoide the blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his speare requited him againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That both his sides were thrilled with the throw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a large streame of blood out of the wound did flow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He, tombling downe, with gnashing teeth did bite</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bitter earth, and bad to lett him in</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the balefull house of endlesse night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where wicked ghosts doe waile their former sin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho gan the battaile freshly to begin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For nathemore for that spectacle bad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did th’other two their cruell vengeaunce blin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But both attonce on both sides him bestad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And load upon him layd his life for to have had.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho when that villayn he aviz’d, which late</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Affrighted had the fairest Florimell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of fiers fury and indignant hate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To him he turned, and with rigor fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Smote him so rudely on the Pannikell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to the chin he clefte his head in twaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Downe on the ground his carkas groveling fell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His sinfull sowle with desperate disdaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of her fleshly ferme fled to the place of paine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That seeing, now the only last of three</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who with that wicked shafte him wounded had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Trembling with horror, as that did foresee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fearefull end of his avengement sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through which he follow should his brethren bad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His bootelesse bow in feeble hand upcaught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therewith shott an arrow at the lad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, fayntly fluttering, scarce his helmet raught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And glauncing fel to ground, but him annoyed naught.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that he would have fled into the wood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Timias him lightly overhent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right as he entring was into the flood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strooke at him with force so violent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That headlesse him into the foord he sent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The carcas with the streame was carried downe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But th’head fell backeward on the Continent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So mischief fel upon the meaners crowne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They three be dead with shame, the Squire lives with renowne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He lives, but takes small joy of his renowne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For of that cruell wound he bled so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from his steed he fell in deadly swowne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet still the blood forth gusht in so great store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he lay wallowd all in his owne gore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now God thee keepe, thou gentlest squire alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Els shall thy loving Lord thee see no more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But both of comfort him thou shalt deprive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke thy selfe of honor which thou didst atchive.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Providence hevenly passeth living thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doth for wretched mens reliefe make way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For loe! great grace or fortune thither brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Comfort to him that comfortlesse now lay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In those same woods ye well remember may</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How that a noble hunteresse did wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee, that base Braggadochio did affray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And make him fast out of the forest ronne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Belphœbe was her name, as faire as Phœbus sunne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She on a day, as shee pursewd the chace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of some wilde beast, which with her arrowes keene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She wounded had, the same along did trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By tract of blood, which she had freshly seene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To have besprinckled all the grassy greene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By the great persue which she there perceav’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well hoped shee the beast engor’d had beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made more haste the life to have bereav’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ah! her expectation greatly was deceav’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Shortly she came whereas that wofull Squire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With blood deformed, lay in deadly swownd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In whose faire eyes, like lamps of quenched fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Christall humor stood congealed rownd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His locks, like faded leaves fallen to grownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Knotted with blood in bounches rudely ran;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his sweete lips, on which before that stownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bud of youth to blossome faire began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spoild of their rosy red were woxen pale and wan.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Saw never living eie more heavy sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That could have made a rocke of stone to rew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or rive in twaine: which when that Lady bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besides all hope, with melting eies did vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All suddeinly abasht shee chaunged hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with sterne horror backward gan to start;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when shee better him beheld shee grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of soft passion and unwonted smart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The point of pitty perced through her tender hart.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Meekely shee bowed downe, to weete if life</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yett in his frosen members did remaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, feeling by his pulses beating rife</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the weake sowle her seat did yett retaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She cast to comfort him with busie paine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His double folded necke she reard upright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rubd his temples and each trembling vaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mayled haberjeon she did undight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from his head his heavy burganet did light.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Into the woods thenceforth in haste shee went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke for hearbes that mote him remedy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For shee of herbes had great intendiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Taught of the Nymphe which from her infancy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her nourced had in trew Nobility:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There, whether yt divine Tobacco were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or Panachæa, or Polygony,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee fownd, and brought it to her patient deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who al this while lay bleding out his hart-blood neare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The soveraine weede betwixt two marbles plaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee pownded small, and did in peeces bruze;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then atweene her lilly handes twaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into his wound the juice thereof did scruze;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And round about, as she could well it uze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The flesh therewith shee suppled and did steepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T’abate all spasme, and soke the swelling bruze;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, after having searcht the intuse deepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She with her scarf did bind the wound from cold to keepe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By this he had sweet life recur’d agayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, groning inly deepe, at last his eies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His watry eies drizling like deawy rayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He up gan lifte toward the azure skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whence descend all hopelesse remedies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith he sigh’d; and, turning him aside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The goodly Maide, ful of divinities</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gifts of heavenly grace, he by him spide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her bow and gilden quiver lying him beside.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Mercy, deare Lord!” (said he) “what grace in this</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That thou hast shewed to me sinfull wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To send thine Angell from her bowre of blis</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To comfort me in my distressed plight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Angell, or Goddesse doe I call thee right?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What service may I doe unto thee meete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hast from darkenes me returnd to light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with thy hevenly salves and med’cines sweete</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hast drest my sinfull wounds? I kisse thy blessed feete.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereat she blushing said; “Ah! gentle Squire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor Goddesse I, nor Angell; but the Mayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And daughter of a woody Nymphe, desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No service but thy safety and ayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which if thou gaine, I shal be well apayd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wee mortall wights, whose lives and fortunes bee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To commun accidents stil open layd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are bownd with commun bond of fraïltee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To succor wretched wights who we captived see.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By this her Damzells, which the former chace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had undertaken after her, arryv’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As did Belphœbe, in the bloody place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thereby deemd the beast had bene depriv’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of life, whom late their ladies arrow ryv’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forthy the bloody tract they followd fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every one to ronne the swiftest stryv’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But two of them the rest far overpast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And where their Lady was arrived at the last.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Where when they saw that goodly boy with blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Defowled, and their Lady dresse his wownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They wondred much; and shortly understood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How him in deadly case theyr Lady fownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And reskewed out of the heavy stownd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones his warlike courser, which was strayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Farre in the woodes whiles that he lay in swownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She made those Damzels search; which being stayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They did him set theron, and forth with them convayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Into that forest farre they thence him led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where was their dwelling, in a pleasant glade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With mountaines rownd about environed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mightie woodes which did the valley shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And like a stately Theatre it made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spreading it selfe into a spatious plaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the midst a little river plaide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emongst the pumy stones, which seemd to plaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With gentle murmure that his cours they did restraine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Beside the same a dainty place there lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Planted with mirtle trees and laurells greene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which the birds song many a lovely lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Gods high praise, and of their loves sweet teene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As it an earthly Paradize had beene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In whose enclosed shadow there was pight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A faire Pavilion, scarcely to bee seene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which was al within most richly dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That greatest Princes liking it mote well delight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thither they brought that wounded Squyre, and layd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In easie couch his feeble limbes to rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He rested him awhile; and then the Mayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His readie wound with better salves new drest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Daily she dressed him, and did the best</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His grievous hurt to guarish, that she might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shortly she his dolour hath redrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his foule sore reduced to faire plight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It she reduced, but himselfe destroyed quight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O foolish physick, and unfruitfull paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That heales up one, and makes another wound!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She his hurt thigh to him recurd againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But hurt his hart, the which before was sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through an unwary dart, which did rebownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From her faire eyes and gratious countenaunce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What bootes it him from death to be unbownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be captived in endlesse duraunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sorrow and despeyre without aleggeaunce!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Still as his wound did gather, and grow hole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So still his hart woxe sore, and health decayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Madnesse to save a part, and lose the whole!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still whenas he beheld the heavenly Mayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles dayly playsters to his wownd she layd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So still his Malady the more increast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles her matchlesse beautie him dismayd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah God! what other could he do at least,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But love so fayre a Lady that his life releast?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Long while he strove in his corageous brest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With reason dew the passion to subdew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And love for to dislodge out of his nest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still when her excellencies he did vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her soveraine bountie and celestiall hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The same to love he strongly was constraynd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when his meane estate he did revew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He from such hardy boldnesse was restraynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of his lucklesse lott and cruell love thus playnd:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Unthankfull wretch,” (said he) “is this the meed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which her soverain mercy thou doest quight?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy life she saved by her gratious deed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But thou doest weene with villeinous despight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To blott her honour, and her heavenly light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dye rather, dye, then so disloyally</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deeme of her high desert, or seeme so light:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayre death it is, to shonne more shame, to dy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dye rather, dy, then ever love disloyally.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But if to love disloyalty it bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall I then hate her that from deathes dore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me brought? ah, farre be such reproch fro mee!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What can I lesse doe then her love therefore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith I her dew reward cannot restore?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dye rather, dye, and dying doe her serve;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dying her serve, and living her adore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy life she gave, thy life she doth deserve:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dye rather, dye, then ever from her service swerve.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But, foolish boy, what bootes thy service bace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To her to whom the hevens doe serve and sew?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou, a mean Squyre of meeke and lowly place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She, hevenly borne and of celestiall hew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How then? of all love taketh equall vew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doth not highest God vouchsafe to take</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The love and service of the basest crew?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If she will not, dye meekly for her sake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dye rather, dye, then ever so faire love forsake!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus warreid he long time against his will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that through weaknesse he was forst at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To yield himselfe unto the mightie ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, as a victour proud, gan ransack fast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His inward partes, and all his entrayles wast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That neither blood in face nor life in hart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It left, but both did quite drye up and blast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As percing levin, which the inner part</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of every thing consumes, and calcineth by art.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which seeing fayre Belphœbe gan to feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least that his wound were inly well not heald,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that the wicked steele empoysned were:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Litle shee weend that love he close conceald.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet still he wasted, as the snow congeald</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When the bright sunne his beams theron doth beat:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet never he his hart to her reveald;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But rather chose to dye for sorow great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then with dishonorable termes her to entreat.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She, gracious Lady, yet no paines did spare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To doe him ease, or doe him remedy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Many Restoratives of vertues rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And costly Cordialles she did apply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To mitigate his stubborne malady:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that sweet Cordiall, which can restore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A love-sick hart, she did to him envy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To him, and to all th’unworthy world forlore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She did envy that soveraine salve in secret store.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That daintie Rose, the daughter of her Morne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More deare then life she tendered, whose flowre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The girlond of her honour did adorne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne suffred she the Middayes scorching powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne the sharp Northerne wind thereon to showre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But lapped up her silken leaves most chayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When so the froward skye began to lowre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, soone as calmed was the christall ayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She did it fayre dispred and let to florish fayre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eternall God, in his almightie powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make ensample of his heavenly grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Paradize whylome did plant this flowre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence he it fetcht out of her native place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did in stocke of earthly flesh enrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That mortall men her glory should admyre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In gentle Ladies breste and bounteous race</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of woman kind it fayrest Flowre doth spyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And beareth fruit of honour and all chast desyre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Fayre ympes of beautie, whose bright shining beames</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adorne the world with like to heavenly light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to your willes both royalties and Reames</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Subdew, through conquest of your wondrous might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With this fayre flowre your goodly girlonds dight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of chastity and vertue virginall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shall embellish more your beautie bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And crowne your heades with heavenly coronall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as the Angels weare before Gods tribunall!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To your faire selves a faire ensample frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of this faire virgin, this Belphebe fayre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom, in perfect love and spotlesse fame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of chastitie, none living may compayre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne poysnous Envy justly can empayre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The prayse of her fresh flowring Maydenhead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forthy she standeth on the highest stayre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of th’honorable stage of womanhead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Ladies all may follow her ensample dead.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In so great prayse of stedfast chastity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nathlesse she was so courteous and kynde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tempred with grace and goodly modesty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemed those two vertues strove to fynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The higher place in her Heroick mynd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So striving each did other more augment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both encreast the prayse of woman kynde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both encreast her beautie excellent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So all did make in her a perfect complement.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-6" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The birth of faire Belphoebe and</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of Amorett is told.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Gardins of Adonis fraught</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With pleasures manifold.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Well may I weene, faire Ladies, all this while</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye wonder how this noble Damozell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So great perfections did in her compile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith that in salvage forests she did dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So farre from court and royall Citadell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The great schoolmaistresse of all courtesy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seemeth that such wilde woodes should far expell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All civile usage and gentility,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gentle sprite deforme with rude rusticity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But to this faire Belphœbe in her berth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hevens so favorable were and free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Looking with myld aspect upon the earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In th’Horoscope of her nativitee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the gifts of grace and chastitee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On her they poured forth of plenteous horne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Jove laught on Venus from his soverayne see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Phœbus with faire beames did her adorne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the Graces rockt her cradle being borne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her berth was of the wombe of Morning dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her conception of the joyous Prime;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all her whole creation did her shew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pure and unspotted from all loathly crime</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is ingenerate in fleshly slime.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So was this virgin borne, so was she bred;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So was she trayned up from time to time</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In all chaste vertue and true bounti-hed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till to her dew perfection she were ripened.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her mother was the faire Chrysogonee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The daughter of Amphisa, who by race</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Faerie was, yborne of high degree.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She bore Belphœbe; she bore in like cace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayre Amoretta in the second place:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These two were twinnes, and twixt them two did share</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The heritage of all celestiall grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the rest it seemd they robbed bare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of bounty, and of beautie, and all vertues rare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It were a goodly storie to declare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By what straunge accident faire Chrysogone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Conceiv’d these infants, and how them she bare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In this wilde forrest wandring all alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After she had nine moneths fulfild and gone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For not as other wemens commune brood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They were enwombed in the sacred throne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her chaste bodie; nor with commune food,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As other wemens babes, they sucked vitall blood:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But wondrously they were begot and bred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through influence of th’hevens fruitfull ray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As it in antique bookes is mentioned.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It was upon a Sommers shinie day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When Titan faire his beames did display,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In a fresh fountaine, far from all mens vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She bath’d her brest the boyling heat t’allay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She bath’d with roses red and violets blew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the sweetest flowers that in the forrest grew:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Till faint through yrkesome wearines, adowne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the grassy ground her selfe she layd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sleepe, the whiles a gentle slombring swowne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon her fell, all naked bare displayd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sunbeames bright upon her body playd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being through former bathing mollifide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pierst into her wombe, where they embayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With so sweet sence and secret powre unspide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in her pregnant flesh they shortly fructifide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Miraculous may seeme to him that reades</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So straunge ensample of conception;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But reason teacheth that the fruitfull seades</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all things living, through impression</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the sunbeames in moyst complexion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe life conceive and quickned are by kynd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So, after Nilus inundation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Infinite shapes of creatures men doe fynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Informed in the mud on which the Sunne hath shynd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Great father he of generation</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is rightly cald, th’authour of life and light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his faire sister for creation</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ministreth matter fit, which, tempred right</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With heate and humour, breedes the living wight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So sprong these twinnes in womb of Chrysogone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet wist she nought thereof, but sore affright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wondred to see her belly so upblone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which still increast till she her terme had full outgone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whereof conceiving shame and foule disgrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Albe her guiltlesse conscience her cleard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She fled into the wildernesse a space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that unweeldy burden she had reard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shund dishonor which as death she feard:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where, wearie of long traveill, downe to rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her selfe she set, and comfortably cheard:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There a sad cloud of sleepe her overkest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seized every sence with sorrow sore opprest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It fortuned, faire Venus having lost</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her little sonne, the winged god of love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, for some light displeasure which him crost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was from her fled as flit as ayery Dove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And left her blisfull bowre of joy above:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(So from her often he had fled away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When she for ought him sharpely did reprove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wandred in the world in straunge aray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Disguiz’d in thousand shapes, that none might him bewray.)</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Him for to seeke, she left her heavenly hous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The house of goodly formes and faire aspect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence all the world derives the glorious</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Features of beautie, and all shapes select,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which high God his workmanship hath deckt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And searched everie way through which his wings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had borne him, or his tract she mote detect:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She promist kisses sweet, and sweeter things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the man that of him tydings to her brings.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>First she him sought in Court, where most he us’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whylome to haunt, but there she found him not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But many there she found which sore accus’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His falshood, and with fowle infamous blot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His cruell deedes and wicked wyles did spot:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ladies and Lordes she everywhere mote heare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Complayning, how with his empoysned shot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their wofull harts he wounded had whyleare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so had left them languishing twixt hope and feare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She then the Cities sought from gate to gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And everie one did aske, did he him see?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And everie one her answerd, that too late</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He had him seene, and felt the crueltee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his sharpe dartes and whot artilleree:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every one threw forth reproches rife</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his mischievous deedes, and sayd that hee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was the disturber of all civill life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The enimy of peace, and authour of all strife.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then in the countrey she abroad him sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the rurall cottages inquir’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where also many plaintes to her were brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How he their heedelesse harts with love had fir’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his false venim through their veines inspir’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the gentle Shepheard swaynes, which sat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Keeping their fleecy flockes as they were hyr’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She sweetly heard complaine, both how and what</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her sonne had to them doen; yet she did smile thereat.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when in none of all these she him got,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She gan avize where els he mote him hyde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last she her bethought that she had not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet sought the salvage woods and forests wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which full many lovely Nymphes abyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst whom might be that he did closely lye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that the love of some of them him tyde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forthy she thither cast her course t’apply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To search the secret haunts of Dianes company.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Shortly unto the wastefull woods she came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereas she found the Goddesse with her crew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After late chace of their embrewed game,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sitting beside a fountaine in a rew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some of them washing with the liquid dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From off their dainty limbs the dusty sweat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soyle, which did deforme their lively hew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Others lay shaded from the scorching heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rest upon her person gave attendance great.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She, having hong upon a bough on high</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her bow and painted quiver, had unlaste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her silver buskins from her nimble thigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her lanck loynes ungirt, and brests unbraste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After her heat the breathing cold to taste:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her golden lockes, that late in tresses bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Embreaded were for hindring of her haste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now loose about her shoulders hong undight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And were with sweet Ambrosia all besprinckled light.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as she Venus saw behinde her backe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She was asham’d to be so loose surpriz’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And woxe halfe wroth against her damzels slacke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That had not her thereof before aviz’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But suffred her so carelesly disguiz’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be overtaken. Soone her garments loose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upgath’ring, in her bosome she compriz’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well as she might, and to the Goddesse rose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whiles all her Nymphes did like a girlond her enclose.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Goodly she gan faire Cytherea greet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shortly asked her, what cause her brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into that wildernesse for her unmeet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From her sweete bowres, and beds with pleasures fraught?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That suddein chaunge she straunge adventure thought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom halfe weeping she thus answered;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she her dearest sonne Cupido sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who in his frowardnes from her was fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she repented sore to have him angered.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereat Diana gan to smile, in scorne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her vaine playnt, and to her scoffing sayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Great pitty sure that ye be so forlorne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of your gay sonne, that gives ye so good ayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To your disports: ill mote ye bene apayd.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she was more engrieved, and replide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Faire sister, ill beseemes it to upbrayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A dolefull heart with so disdainfull pride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The like that mine may be your paine another tide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“As you in woods and wanton wildernesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your glory sett to chace the salvage beasts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So my delight is all in joyfulnesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In beds, in bowres, in banckets, and in feasts:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ill becomes you, with your lofty creasts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To scorne the joy that Jove is glad to seeke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We both are bownd to follow heavens beheasts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tend our charges with obeisaunce meeke.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spare, gentle sister, with reproch my paine to eeke;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And tell me, if that ye my sonne have heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To lurke emongst your Nimphes in secret wize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or keepe their cabins: much I am affeard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least he like one of them him selfe disguize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And turne his arrowes to their exercize.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So may he long him selfe full easie hide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he is faire and fresh in face and guize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As any Nimphe; (let not it be envide.”)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So saying, every Nimph full narrowly shee eide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Phœbe therewith sore was angered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sharply saide: “Goe, Dame; goe, seeke your boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where you him lately lefte, in Mars his bed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He comes not here; we scorne his foolish joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne lend we leisure to his idle toy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if I catch him in this company,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By Stygian lake I vow, whose sad annoy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Gods doe dread, he dearly shall abye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ile clip his wanton wings, that he no more shall flye.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom whenas Venus saw so sore displeasd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee inly sory was, and gan relent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What shee had said; so her she soone appeasd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sugred words and gentle blandishment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which as a fountaine from her sweete lips went.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And welled goodly forth, that in short space</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She was well pleasd, and forth her damzells sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through all the woods, to search from place to place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If any tract of him or tidings they mote trace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To search the God of love her Nimphes she sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throughout the wandring forest every where:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after them her selfe eke with her went</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke the fugitive both farre and nere.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So long they sought, till they arrived were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In that same shady covert whereas lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Crysogone in slombry traunce whilere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who in her sleepe (a wondrous thing to say)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unwares had borne two babes, as faire as springing day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Unwares she them conceivd, unwares she bore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She bore withouten paine, as she conceiv’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withouten pleasure; ne her need implore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lucinaes aide: which when they both perceiv’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They were through wonder nigh of sence berev’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gazing each on other nought bespake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last they both agreed her seeming griev’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of her heavie swowne not to awake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But from her loving side the tender babes to take.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Up they them tooke; each one a babe uptooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with them carried to be fostered.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dame Phœbe to a Nymphe her babe betooke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be upbrought in perfect Maydenhed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, of her selfe, her name Belphœbe red:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Venus hers thence far away convayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be upbrought in goodly womanhed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, in her litle loves stead, which was strayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her Amoretta cald, to comfort her dismayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Shee brought her to her joyous Paradize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wher most she wonnes when she on earth does dwell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So faire a place as Nature can devize:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether in Paphos, or Cytheron hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or it in Gnidus bee, I wote not well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But well I wote by triall, that this same</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All other pleasaunt places doth excell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And called is by her lost lovers name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Gardin of Adonis, far renowmd by fame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In that same Gardin all the goodly flowres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith dame Nature doth her beautify,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And decks the girlonds of her Paramoures,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are fetcht: there is the first seminary</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all things that are borne to live and dye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">According to their kynds. Long worke it were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here to account the endlesse progeny</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the weeds that bud and blossome there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But so much as doth need must needs be counted here.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It sited was in fruitfull soyle of old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And girt in with two walls on either side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The one of yron, the other of bright gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none might thorough breake, nor overstride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And double gates it had which opened wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which both in and out men moten pas:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th’one faire and fresh, the other old and dride.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Old Genius the porter of them was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old Genius, the which a double nature has.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He letteth in, he letteth out to wend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All that to come into the world desire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A thousand thousand naked babes attend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About him day and night, which doe require</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he with fleshly weeds would them attire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as him list, such as eternall fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ordained hath, he clothes with sinfull mire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sendeth forth to live in mortall state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till they agayn returne backe by the hinder gate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>After that they againe retourned beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They in that Gardin planted bee agayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And grow afresh, as they had never seene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fleshly corruption, nor mortall payne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some thousand yeares so doen they there remayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then of him are clad with other hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or sent into the chaungefull world agayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till thither they retourne where first they grew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, like a wheele, arownd they ronne from old to new.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne needs there Gardiner to sett or sow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To plant or prune; for of their owne accord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All things, as they created were, doe grow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet remember well the mighty word</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which first was spoken by th’Almighty Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That bad them to increase and multiply:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne doe they need with water of the ford,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or of the clouds, to moysten their roots dry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For in themselves eternall moisture they imply.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Infinite shapes of creatures there are bred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And uncouth formes, which none yet ever knew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every sort is in a sondry bed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sett by it selfe, and ranckt in comely rew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some fitt for reasonable sowles t’indew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some made for beasts, some made for birds to weare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the fruitfull spawne of fishes hew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In endlesse rancks along enraunged were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That seemd the Ocean could not containe them there.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Daily they grow, and daily forth are sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the world, it to replenish more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet is the stocke not lessened nor spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But still remaines in everlasting store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As it at first created was of yore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For in the wide wombe of the world there lyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hatefull darknes and in deepe horrore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An huge eternall Chaos, which supplyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The substaunces of natures fruitfull progenyes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All things from thence doe their first being fetch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And borrow matter whereof they are made;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, whenas forme and feature it does ketch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Becomes a body, and doth then invade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The state of life out of the griesly shade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That substaunce is eterne, and bideth so;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne when the life decayes and forme does fade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth it consume and into nothing goe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But chaunged is, and often altred to and froe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The substaunce is not chaungd nor altered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But th’only forme and outward fashion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For every substaunce is conditioned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To chaunge her hew, and sondry formes to don,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Meet for her temper and complexion:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For formes are variable, and decay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By course of kinde and by occasion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that faire flowre of beautie fades away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As doth the lilly fresh before the sunny ray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Great enimy to it, and to all the rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in the Gardin of Adonis springs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is wicked Tyme; who with his scyth addrest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Does mow the flowring herbes and goodly things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all their glory to the ground downe flings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where they do wither, and are fowly mard:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He flyes about, and with his flaggy winges</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beates downe both leaves and buds without regard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne ever pitty may relent his malice hard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet pitty often did the gods relent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see so faire thinges mard and spoiled quight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And their great mother Venus did lament</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The losse of her deare brood, her deare delight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her hart was pierst with pitty at the sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When walking through the Gardin them she saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet no’te she find redresse for such despight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all that lives is subject to that law;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All things decay in time, and to their end doe draw.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But were it not that Time their troubler is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All that in this delightfull Gardin growes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should happy bee, and have immortall blis:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For here all plenty and all pleasure flowes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sweete love gentle fitts emongst them throwes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without fell rancor or fond gealosy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Franckly each Paramor his leman knowes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each bird his mate; ne any does envy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their goodly meriment and gay felicity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There is continuall Spring, and harvest there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Continuall, both meeting at one tyme:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For both the boughes doe laughing blossoms beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with fresh colours decke the wanton Pryme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke attonce the heavy trees they clyme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which seeme to labour under their fruites lode:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles the joyous birdes make their pastyme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emongst the shady leaves, their sweet abode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And their trew loves without suspition tell abrode.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Right in the middest of that Paradise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There stood a stately Mount, on whose round top</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A gloomy grove of mirtle trees did rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose shady boughes sharp steele did never lop,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor wicked beastes their tender buds did crop,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But like a girlond compassed the hight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from their fruitfull sydes sweet gum did drop,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the ground, with pretious deaw bedight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Threw forth most dainty odours and most sweet delight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And in the thickest covert of that shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There was a pleasaunt Arber, not by art</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But of the trees owne inclination made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which knitting their rancke braunches, part to part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With wanton yvie twine entrayld athwart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Eglantine and Caprifole emong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fashiond above within their inmost part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nether Phœbus beams could through them throng,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor Æolus sharp blast could worke them any wrong.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And all about grew every sort of flowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which sad lovers were transformde of yore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fresh Hyacinthus, Phœbus paramoure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dearest love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Foolish Narcisse, that likes the watry shore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sad Amaranthus, made a flowre but late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sad Amaranthus, in whose purple gore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me seemes I see Amintas wretched fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To whom sweet Poets verse hath given endlesse date.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There wont fayre Venus often to enjoy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her deare Adonis joyous company,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And reape sweet pleasure of the wanton boy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There yet, some say, in secret he does ly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lapped in flowres and pretious spycery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By her hid from the world, and from the skill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Stygian Gods, which doe her love envy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she her selfe, when ever that she will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Possesseth him, and of his sweetnesse takes her fill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And sooth, it seemes, they say; for he may not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ever dye, and ever buried bee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In balefull night where all thinges are forgot:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All be he subject to mortalitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet is eterne in mutabilitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by succession made perpetuall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Transformed oft, and chaunged diverslie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For him the Father of all formes they call:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therfore needs mote he live, that living gives to all.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There now he liveth in eternall blis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Joying his goddesse, and of her enjoyd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne feareth he henceforth that foe of his,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with his cruell tuske him deadly cloyd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that wilde Bore, the which him once annoyd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She firmely hath emprisoned for ay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her sweet love his malice mote avoyd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In a strong rocky Cave, which is, they say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hewen underneath that Mount, that none him losen may.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There now he lives in everlasting joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With many of the Gods in company</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which thither haunt, and with the winged boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sporting him selfe in safe felicity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who when he hath with spoiles and cruelty</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ransackt the world, and in the wofull harts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of many wretches set his triumphes hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thither resortes, and, laying his sad dartes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Asyde, with faire Adonis playes his wanton partes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And his trew love faire Psyche with him playes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayre Psyche to him lately reconcyld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After long troubles and unmeet upbrayes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which his mother Venus her revyld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke himselfe her cruelly exyld:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But now in stedfast love and happy state</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She with him lives, and hath him borne a chyld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pleasure, that doth both gods and men aggrate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pleasure, the daughter of Cupid and Psyche late.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hither great Venus brought this infant fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The yonger daughter of Chrysogonee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto Psyche with great trust and care</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Committed her, yfostered to bee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And trained up in trew feminitee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who no lesse carefully her tendered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then her owne daughter Pleasure, to whom shee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made her companion, and her lessoned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In all the lore of love, and goodly womanhead.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In which when she to perfect ripenes grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of grace and beautie noble Paragone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She brought her forth into the worldes vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be th’ensample of true love alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Lodestarre of all chaste affection</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To all fayre Ladies that doe live on grownd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Faery court she came; where many one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Admyrd her goodly haveour, and fownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His feeble hart wide launched with loves cruel wownd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But she to none of them her love did cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save to the noble knight Sir Scudamore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom her loving hart she linked fast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In faithfull love, t’abide for evermore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for his dearest sake endured sore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sore trouble of an hainous enimy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who her would forced have to have forlore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her former love and stedfast loialty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As ye may elswhere reade that ruefull history.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But well I weene, ye first desire to learne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What end unto that fearefull Damozell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which fledd so fast from that same foster stearne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom with his brethren Timias slew, befell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was, to weet, the goodly Florimell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who wandring for to seeke her lover deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her lover deare, her dearest Marinell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into misfortune fell, as ye did heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from Prince Arthure fled with wings of idle feare.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-7" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The witches sonne loves Florimell:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">She flyes; he faines to die.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Satyrane save the Squire of Dames</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">From Gyaunts tyranny.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Like as an Hynd forth singled from the heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hath escaped from a ravenous beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet flyes away of her owne feete afeard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every leafe, that shaketh with the least</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Murmure of winde, her terror hath encreast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So fledd fayre Florimell from her vaine feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long after she from perill was releast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each shade she saw, and each noyse she did heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did seeme to be the same which she escapt whileare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All that same evening she in flying spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all that night her course continewed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne did she let dull sleepe once to relent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor wearinesse to slack her hast, but fled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ever alike, as if her former dred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were hard behind, her ready to arrest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her white Palfrey, having conquered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The maistring raines out of her weary wrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perforce her carried where ever he thought best.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So long as breath and hable puissaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did native corage unto him supply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His pace he freshly forward did advaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And carried her beyond all jeopardy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But nought that wanteth rest can long aby:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He, having through incessant traveill spent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His force, at last perforce adowne did ly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne foot could further move. The Lady gent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereat was suddein strook with great astonishment;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, forst t’alight, on foot mote algates fare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A traveiler unwonted to such way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Need teacheth her this lesson hard and rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That fortune all in equall launce doth sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mortall miseries doth make her play.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So long she traveild, till at length she came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To an hilles side, which did to her bewray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A litle valley subject to the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All coverd with thick woodes that quite it overcame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Through the tops of the high trees she did descry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A litle smoke, whose vapour thin and light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Reeking aloft uprolled to the sky:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which chearefull signe did send unto her sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in the same did wonne some living wight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones her steps she thereunto applyd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And came at last in weary wretched plight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the place, to which her hope did guyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To finde some refuge there, and rest her wearie syde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There in a gloomy hollow glen she found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A little cottage, built of stickes and reedes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In homely wize, and wald with sods around;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which a witch did dwell, in loathly weedes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wilfull want, all carelesse of her needes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So choosing solitarie to abide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far from all neighbours, that her divelish deedes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hellish arts from people she might hide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hurt far off unknowne whom ever she envide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Damzell there arriving entred in;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where sitting on the flore the Hag she found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Busie (as seem’d) about some wicked gin:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, soone as she beheld that suddein stound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lightly upstarted from the dustie ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with fell looke and hollow deadly gaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stared on her awhile, as one astound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne had one word to speake for great amaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But shewd by outward signes that dread her sence did daze.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last, turning her feare to foolish wrath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She askt, what devill had her thither brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And who she was, and what unwonted path</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had guided her, unwelcomed, unsought?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which the Damzell, full of doubtfull thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her mildly answer’d: “Beldame, be not wroth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With silly Virgin, by adventure brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto your dwelling, ignorant and loth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That crave but rowme to rest while tempest overblo’th.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that adowne out of her christall eyne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Few trickling teares she softly forth let fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That like to orient perles did purely shyne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon her snowy cheeke; and therewithall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She sighed soft, that none so bestiall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor salvage hart, but ruth of her sad plight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would make to melt, or pitteously appall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that vile Hag, all were her whole delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In mischiefe, was much moved at so pitteous sight;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And gan recomfort her in her rude wyse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With womanish compassion of her plaint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wiping the teares from her suffused eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bidding her sit downe, to rest her faint</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wearie limbes awhile. She, nothing quaint</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor ’sdeignfull of so homely fashion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith brought she was now to so hard constraint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sate downe upon the dusty ground anon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As glad of that small rest as Bird of tempest gon.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho gan she gather up her garments rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her loose lockes to dight in order dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With golden wreath and gorgeous ornament;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom such whenas the wicked Hag did vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She was astonisht at her heavenly hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doubted her to deeme an earthly wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But or some Goddesse, or of Dianes crew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thought her to adore with humble spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>T’adore thing so divine as beauty were but right.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This wicked woman had a wicked sonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The comfort of her age and weary dayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A laesy loord, for nothing good to donne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But stretched forth in ydlenesse alwayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever cast his mind to covet prayse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ply himselfe to any honest trade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all the day before the sunny rayes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He us’d to slug, or sleepe in slothfull shade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such laesinesse both lewd and poore attonce him made.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He, comming home at undertime, there found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fayrest creature that he ever saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sitting beside his mother on the ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sight whereof did greatly him adaw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his base thought with terrour and with aw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So inly smot, that as one, which hath gaz’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On the bright Sunne unwares, doth soone withdraw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His feeble eyne, with too much brightnes daz’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So stared he on her, and stood long while amaz’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Softly at last he gan his mother aske,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What mister wight that was, and whence deriv’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in so straunge disguizement there did maske,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by what accident she there arriv’d?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she, as one nigh of her wits depriv’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With nought but ghastly lookes him answered;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to a ghost, that lately is reviv’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From Stygian shores where late it wandered:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So both at her, and each at other wondered.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But the fayre Virgin was so meeke and myld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she to them vouchsafed to embace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her goodly port, and to their senses vyld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her gentle speach applyde, that in short space</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She grew familiare in that desert place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">During which time the Chorle, through her so kind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And courteise use, conceiv’d affection bace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cast to love her in his brutish mind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No love, but brutish lust, that was so beastly tind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Closely the wicked flame his bowels brent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shortly grew into outrageous fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet had he not the hart, nor hardiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As unto her to utter his desire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His caytive thought durst not so high aspire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with soft sighes and lovely semblaunces</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He ween’d that his affection entire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She should aread; many resemblaunces</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To her he made, and many kinde remembraunces.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Oft from the forrest wildings he did bring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose sides empurpled were with smyling red;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oft young birds, which he had taught to sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His maistresse praises sweetly caroled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Girlonds of flowres sometimes for her faire hed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He fine would dight; sometimes the squirrell wild</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He brought to her in bands, as conquered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be her thrall, his fellow-servant vild:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All which she of him tooke with countenance meeke and mild.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, past a while, when she fit season saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To leave that desert mansion, she cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In secret wize herselfe thence to withdraw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For feare of mischiefe, which she did forecast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might by the witch or by her sonne compast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her wearie Palfrey, closely as she might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now well recovered after long repast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his proud furnitures she freshly dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His late miswandred wayes now to remeasure right.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And earely, ere the dawning day appear’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She forth issewed, and on her journey went:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She went in perill, of each noyse affeard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of each shade that did it selfe present;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For still she feared to be overhent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that vile hag, or her uncivile sonne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who when, too late awaking, well they kent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That their fayre guest was gone, they both begonne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make exceeding mone, as they had been undonne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But that lewd lover did the most lament</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For her depart, that ever man did heare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He knockt his brest with desperate intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And scratcht his face, and with his teeth did teare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His rugged flesh, and rent his ragged heare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That his sad mother, seeing his sore plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was greatly woe begon, and gan to feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least his fraile senses were emperisht quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And love to frenzy turnd, sith love is franticke hight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All wayes shee sought him to restore to plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With herbs, with charms, with counsel, and with teares;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But tears, nor charms, nor herbs, nor counsell, might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Asswage the fury which his entrails teares:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So strong is passion that no reason heares.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho when all other helpes she saw to faile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She turnd her selfe backe to her wicked leares;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by her divelish arts thought to prevaile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bringe her backe againe, or worke her finall bale.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftesoones out of her hidden cave she cald</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An hideous beast of horrible aspect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That could the stoutest corage have appald;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Monstrous, mishapt, and all his backe was spect</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With thousand spots of colours queint elect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereto so swifte that it all beasts did pas:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like never yet did living eie detect;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But likest it to an Hyena was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That feeds on wemens flesh as others feede on gras.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It forth she cald, and gave it streight in charge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through thicke and thin her to poursew apace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne once to stay to rest, or breath at large,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till her he had attaind and brought in place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or quite devourd her beauties scornefull grace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Monster, swifte as word that from her went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Went forth in haste, and did her footing trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So sure and swiftly, through his perfect sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And passing speede, that shortly he her overhent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when the fearefull Damzell nigh espide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No need to bid her fast away to flie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ugly shape so sore her terrifide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it she shund no lesse then dread to die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her flitt palfrey did so well apply</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His nimble feet to her conceived feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That whitest his breath did strength to him supply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From peril free he away her did beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when his force gan faile his pace gan wex areare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which whenas she perceiv’d, she was dismayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At that same last extremity ful sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of her safety greatly grew afrayd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now she gan approch to the sea shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As it befell, that she could flie no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yield herselfe to spoile of greedinesse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lightly she leaped, as a wight forlore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From her dull horse, in desperate distresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to her feet betooke her doubtfull sickernesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Not halfe so fast the wicked Myrrha fled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From dread of her revenging fathers hond;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor halfe so fast to save her maydenhed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fled fearfull Daphne on th’Ægæan strond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Florimell fled from that Monster yond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To reach the sea ere she of him were raught:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For in the sea to drowne herselfe she fond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rather then of the tyrant to be caught:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereto fear gave her wings, and need her corage taught.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It fortuned (high God did so ordaine)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As shee arrived on the roring shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In minde to leape into the mighty maine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A little bote lay hoving her before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which there slept a fisher old and pore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles his nets were drying on the sand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the same shee lept, and with the ore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did thrust the shallop from the floting strand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So safety fownd at sea which she fownd not at land.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Monster, ready on the pray to sease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was of his forward hope deceived quight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne durst assay to wade the perlous seas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But greedily long gaping at the sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last in vaine was forst to turne his flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tell the idle tidings to his Dame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, to avenge his divelish despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He sett upon her Palfrey tired lame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And slew him cruelly ere any reskew came.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, after having him embowelled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To fill his hellish gorge, it chaunst a knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To passe that way, as forth he traveiled:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yt was a goodly Swaine, and of great might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As ever man that bloody field did fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in vain sheows, that wont yong knights bewitch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And courtly services, tooke no delight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But rather joyd to bee then seemen sich,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For both to be and seeme to him was labor lich.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It was to weete the good Sir Satyrane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That raungd abrode to seeke adventures wilde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As was his wont, in forest and in plaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He was all armd in rugged steele unfilde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As in the smoky forge it was compilde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his Scutchin bore a Satyres hedd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He comming present, where the Monster vilde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon that milke-white Palfreyes carcas fedd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto his reskew ran, and greedily him spedd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There well perceivd he that it was the horse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereon faire Florimell was wont to ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of that feend was rent without remorse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much feared he least ought did ill betide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To that faire Maide, the flowre of wemens pride;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For her he dearely loved, and in all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His famous conquests highly magnifide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besides, her golden girdle, which did fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From her in flight, he fownd, that did him sore apall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Full of sad feare and doubtfull agony</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fiercely he flew upon that wicked feend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with huge strokes and cruell battery</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him forst to leave his pray, for to attend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him selfe from deadly daunger to defend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full many wounds in his corrupted flesh</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He did engrave, and muchell blood did spend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet might not doe him die: but aie more fresh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fierce he still appeard, the more he did him thresh.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He wist not how him to despoile of life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne how to win the wished victory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith him he saw still stronger grow through strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him selfe weaker through infirmity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Greatly he grew enrag’d, and furiously</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hurling his sword away he lightly lept</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the beast, that with great cruelty</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rored and raged to be underkept;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet he perforce him held, and strokes upon him hept.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As he that strives to stop a suddein flood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in strong bancks his violence enclose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forceth it swell above his wonted mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And largely overflow the fruitfull plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the countrey seemes to be a Maine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the rich furrowes flote, all quite fordonne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wofull husbandman doth lowd complaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see his whole yeares labor lost so soone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which to God he made so many an idle boone:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So him he held, and did through might amate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So long he held him, and him bett so long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That at the last his fiercenes gan abate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And meekely stoup unto the victor strong:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, to avenge the implacable wrong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he supposed donne to Florimell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sought by all meanes his dolor to prolong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith dint of steele his carcas could not quell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His maker with her charmes had framed him so well.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The golden ribband, which that virgin wore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About her sclender waste, he tooke in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with it bownd the beast, that lowd did rore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For great despight of that unwonted band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet dared not his victor to withstand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But trembled like a lambe fled from the pray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the way him followd on the strand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he had long bene learned to obay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet never learned he such service till that day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus as he led the Beast along the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He spide far off a mighty Giauntesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fast flying, on a Courser dapled gray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From a bold knight that with great hardinesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her hard pursewd, and sought for to suppresse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She bore before her lap a dolefull Squire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lying athwart her horse in great distresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fast bounden hand and foote with cords of wire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom she did meane to make the thrall of her desire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which whenas Satyrane beheld, in haste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He lefte his captive Beast at liberty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And crost the nearest way, by which he cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her to encounter ere she passed by;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she the way shund nathemore forthy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But forward gallopt fast; which when he spyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mighty speare he couched warily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at her ran: she, having him descryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her selfe to fight addrest, and threw her lode aside.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like as a Goshauke, that in foote doth beare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A trembling Culver, having spide on hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An Eagle that with plumy wings doth sheare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The subtile ayre stouping with all his might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The quarry throwes to ground with fell despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the batteill doth her selfe prepare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So ran the Geauntesse unto the fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her fyrie eyes with furious sparkes did stare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with blasphemous bannes high God in peeces tare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She caught in hand an huge great yron mace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith she many had of life depriv’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, ere the stroke could seize his aymed place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His speare amids her sun-brode shield arriv’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet nathemore the steele asonder riv’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All were the beame in bignes like a mast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne her out of the stedfast sadle driv’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, glauncing on the tempred metall, brast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In thousand shivers, and so forth beside her past.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her Steed did stagger with that puissaunt strooke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she no more was moved with that might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then it had lighted on an aged Oke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or on the marble Pillour that is pight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the top of Mount Olympus hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the brave youthly Champions to assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With burning charet wheeles it nigh to smite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But who that smites it mars his joyous play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And is the spectacle of ruinous decay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet, therewith sore enrag’d, with sterne regard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her dreadfull weapon she to him addrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which on his helmet martelled so hard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That made him low incline his lofty crest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bowd his battred visour to his brest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith he was so stund that he n’ote ryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But reeled to and fro from east to west.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when his cruell enimy espyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She lightly unto him adjoyned syde to syde;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, on his collar laying puissaunt hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of his wavering seat him pluckt perforse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perforse him pluckt, unable to withstand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or helpe himselfe; and laying thwart her horse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In loathly wise like to a carrion corse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She bore him fast away. Which when the knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her pursewed saw, with great remorse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He nere was touched in his noble spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gan encrease his speed as she encreast her flight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when as nigh approching she espyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She threw away her burden angrily;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she list not the batteill to abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But made her selfe more light away to fly:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet her the hardy knight pursewd so nye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That almost in the backe he oft her strake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But still, when him at hand she did espy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She turnd, and semblaunce of faire fight did make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, when he stayd, to flight againe she did her take.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By this the good Sir Satyrane gan wake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of his dreame that did him long entraunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, seeing none in place, he gan to make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Exceeding mone, and curst that cruell chaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which reft from him so faire a chevisaunce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At length he spyde whereas that wofull Squyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom he had reskewed from captivaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his strong foe, lay tombled in the myre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unable to arise, or foote or hand to styre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom approching, well he mote perceive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In that fowle plight a comely personage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lovely face, made fit for to deceive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fraile Ladies hart with loves consuming rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now in the blossome of his freshest age.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He reard him up and loosd his yron bands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after gan inquire his parentage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And how he fell into the Gyaunts hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And who that was which chaced her along the lands.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then trembling yet through feare the Squire bespake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“That Geauntesse Argantè is behight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A daughter of the Titans which did make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Warre against heven, and heaped hils on hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To scale the skyes and put Jove from his right:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her syre Typhoeus was; who, mad through merth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dronke with blood of men slaine by his might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through incest her of his owne mother Earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whylome begot, being but halfe twin of that berth:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“For at that berth another Babe she bore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet, the mightie Ollyphant, that wrought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great wreake to many errant knights of yore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many hath to foule confusion brought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These twinnes, men say, (a thing far passing thought)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While in their mothers wombe enclosd they were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere they into the lightsom world were brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In fleshly lust were mingled both yfere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in that monstrous wise did to the world appere.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“So liv’d they ever after in like sin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst natures law and good behaveoure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But greatest shame was to that maiden twin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, not content so fowly to devoure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her native flesh and staine her brothers bowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did wallow in all other fleshly myre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And suffred beastes her body to deflowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So whot she burned in that lustfull fyre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet all that might not slake her sensuall desyre:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But over all the countrie she did raunge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke young men to quench her flaming thrust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And feed her fancy with delightfull chaunge:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom so she fittest findes to serve her lust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through her maine strength, in which she most doth trust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She with her bringes into a secret Ile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where in eternall bondage dye he must,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or be the vassall of her pleasures vile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in all shamefull sort him selfe with her defile.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Me, seely wretch, she so at vauntage caught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After she long in waite for me did lye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And meant unto her prison to have brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her lothsom pleasure there to satisfye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That thousand deathes me lever were to dye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then breake the vow that to faire Columbell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I plighted have, and yet keepe stedfastly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As for my name, it mistreth not to tell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Call me the Squyre of Dames; that me beseemeth well.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But that bold knight, whom ye pursuing saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Geauntesse, is not such as she seemd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But a faire virgin that in martiall law</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And deedes of armes above all Dames is deem’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And above many knightes is eke esteemd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For her great worth: She Palladine is hight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She you from death, you me from dread, redeemd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne any may that Monster match in fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But she, or such as she, that is so chaste a wight.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Her well beseemes that Quest,” (quoth Satyrane)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“But read, thou Squyre of Dames, what vow is this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which thou upon thy selfe hast lately ta’ne?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“That shall I you recount,” (quoth he) “ywis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So be ye pleasd to pardon all amis.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That gentle Lady whom I love and serve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After long suit and wearie servicis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did aske me, how I could her love deserve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And how she might be sure that I would never swerve?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“I, glad by any meanes her grace to gaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Badd her commaund my life to save or spill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones she badd me, with incessaunt paine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wander through the world abroad at will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every where, where with my power or skill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I might doe service unto gentle Dames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I the same should faithfully fulfill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at the twelve monethes end should bring their names</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pledges, as the spoiles of my victorious games.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“So well I to faire Ladies service did,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And found such favour in their loving hartes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ere the yeare his course had compassid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thre hundred pledges for my good desartes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thrice three hundred thanks for my good partes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I with me brought, and did to her present:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when she saw, more bent to eke my smartes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then to reward my trusty true intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She gan for me devise a grievous punishment;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“To weet, that I my traveill should resume,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with like labour walke the world arownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever to her presence should presume,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till I so many other Dames had fownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which, for all the suit I could propownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would me refuse their pledges to afford,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But did abide for ever chaste and sownd.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Ah! gentle Squyre,” (quoth he) “tell at one word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How many fownd’st thou such to put in thy record?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Indeed, Sir knight,” (said he) “one word may tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All that I ever fownd so wisely stayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For onely three they were disposd so well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet three yeares I now abrode have strayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To fynd them out.” “Mote I,” (then laughing sayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The knight) “inquire of thee what were those three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which thy proffred curtesie denayd?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ill they seemed sure avizd to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or brutishly brought up, that nev’r did fashions see.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The first which then refused me,” (said hee)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Certes was but a common Courtisane;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet flat refusd to have adoe with mee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because I could not give her many a Jane.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Thereat full hartely laughed Satyrane.)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“The second was an holy Nunne to chose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which would not let me be her Chappellane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because she knew, she said, I would disclose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her counsell, if she should her trust in me repose.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The third a Damzell was of low degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom I in countrey cottage fownd by chaunce:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full litle weened I that chastitee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had lodging in so meane a maintenaunce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was she fayre, and in her countenaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dwelt simple truth in seemely fashion.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long thus I woo’d her with due observaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hope unto my pleasure to have won;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But was as far at last, as when I first begon.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Safe her, I never any woman found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That chastity did for it selfe embrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But were for other causes firme and sound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Either for want of handsome time and place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or else for feare of shame and fowle disgrace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus am I hopelesse ever to attaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Ladies love in such a desperate case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all my dayes am like to waste in vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seeking to match the chaste with th’unchaste Ladies traine.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Perdy” (sayd Satyrane) “thou Squyre of Dames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great labour fondly hast thou hent in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To get small thankes, and therewith many blames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That may emongst Alcides labours stand.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence backe returning to the former land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where late he left the Beast he overcame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He found him not; for he had broke his band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And was returnd againe unto his Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tell what tydings of fayre Florimell became.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-8" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The Witch creates a snowy Lady</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Like to Florimell;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who, wrong’d by Carle, by Proteus sav’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Is sought by Paridell.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>So oft as I this history record,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My heart doth melt with meere compassion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To thinke how causelesse, of her owne accord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This gentle Damzell, whom I write upon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should plonged be in such affliction</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without all hope of comfort or reliefe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sure, I weene, the hardest hart of stone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would hardly finde to aggravate her griefe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For misery craves rather mercy then repriefe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But that accursed Hag, her hostesse late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had so enranckled her malitious hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she desyrd th’abridgement of her fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or long enlargement of her painefull smart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now when the Beast, which by her wicked art</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Late foorth she sent, she backe retourning spyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tyde with her golden girdle; it a part</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her rich spoyles whom he had earst destroyd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She weend, and wondrous gladnes to her hart applyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, with it ronning hast’ly to her sonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thought with that sight him much to have reliv’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, thereby deeming sure the thing as donne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His former griefe with furie fresh reviv’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much more then earst, and would have algates riv’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hart out of his brest: for sith her dedd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He surely dempt, himselfe he thought depriv’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quite of all hope wherewith he long had fedd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His foolish malady, and long time had misledd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With thought whereof exceeding mad he grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his rage his mother would have slaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had she not fled into a secret mew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where she was wont her Sprightes to entertaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The maisters of her art: there was she faine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To call them all in order to her ayde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And them conjure, upon eternall paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To counsell her, so carefully dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How she might heale her sonne whose senses were decayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By their advice, and her owne wicked wit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She there deviz’d a wondrous worke to frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose like on earth was never framed yit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That even Nature selfe envide the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And grudg’d to see the counterfet should shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The thing it selfe: In hand she boldly tooke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make another like the former Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another Florimell, in shape and looke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So lively and so like, that many it mistooke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The substance, whereof she the body made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was purest snow in massy mould congeald,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which she had gathered in a shady glade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the Riphœan hils, to her reveald</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By errant Sprights, but from all men conceald:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The same she tempred with fine Mercury</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And virgin wex that never yet was seald,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mingled them with perfect vermily;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That like a lively sanguine it seemd to the eye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Instead of eyes two burning lampes she set</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In silver sockets, shyning like the skyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And a quicke moving Spirit did arret</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To stirre and roll them like to womens eyes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Instead of yellow lockes she did devyse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With golden wyre to weave her curled head;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet golden wyre was not so yellow thryse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Florimells fayre heare: and, in the stead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of life, she put a Spright to rule the carcas dead;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A wicked Spright, yfraught with fawning guyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fayre resemblance above all the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with the Prince of Darkenes fell somewhyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From heavens blis and everlasting rest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him needed not instruct which way were best</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him selfe to fashion likest Florimell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne how to speake, ne how to use his gest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he in counterfesaunce did excell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the wyles of wemens wits knew passing well.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Him shaped thus she deckt in garments gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Florimell had left behind her late;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That who so then her saw would surely say</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It was her selfe whom it did imitate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or fayrer then her selfe, if ought algate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might fayrer be. And then she forth her brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto her sonne that lay in feeble state;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who seeing her gan streight upstart, and thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She was the Lady selfe whom he so long had sought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho fast her clipping twixt his armes twayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Extremely joyed in so happy sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soone forgot his former sickely payne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she, the more to seeme such as she hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Coyly rebutted his embracement light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet still, with gentle countenaunce, retain’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enough to hold a foole in vaine delight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him long she so with shadowes entertain’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As her Creatresse had in charge to her ordain’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Till on a day, as he disposed was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To walke the woodes with that his Idole faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her to disport and idle time to pas</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In th’open freshnes of the gentle aire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A knight that way there chaunced to repaire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet knight he was not, but a boastfull swaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That deedes of armes had ever in despaire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proud Braggadocchio, that in vaunting vaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His glory did repose, and credit did maintaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He, seeing with that Chorle so faire a wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Decked with many a costly ornament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much merveiled thereat, as well he might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thought that match a fowle disparagement:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His bloody speare eftesoones he boldly bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the silly clowne, who dead through feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fell streight to ground in great astonishment.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Villein,” (sayd he) “this Lady is my deare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dy, if thou it gainesay: I will away her beare.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The fearefull Chorle durst not gainesay nor dooe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But trembling stood, and yielded him the pray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, finding litle leasure her to wooe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On Tromparts steed her mounted without stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And without reskew led her quite away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proud man himselfe then Braggadochio deem’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And next to none after that happy day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being possessed of that spoyle, which seem’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fairest wight on ground, and most of men esteem’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, when hee saw him selfe free from poursute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan make gentle purpose to his Dame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With termes of love and lewdnesse dissolute;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he could well his glozing speaches frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To such vaine uses that him best became:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she thereto would lend but light regard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As seeming sory that she ever came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into his powre, that used her so hard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To reave her honor, which she more then life prefard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus as they two of kindnes treated long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There them by chaunce encountred on the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An armed knight upon a courser strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose trampling feete upon the hollow lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seemed to thunder, and did nigh affray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Capons corage: yet he looked grim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And faynd to cheare his lady in dismay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who seemd for feare to quake in every lim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her to save from outrage meekely prayed him.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Fiercely that straunger forward came: and, nigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Approching, with bold words and bitter threat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bad that same boaster, as he mote, on high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To leave to him that lady for excheat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or bide him batteill without further treat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That challenge did too peremptory seeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fild his senses with abashment great;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet seeing nigh him jeopardy extreme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He it dissembled well, and light seemd to esteeme;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Saying, “Thou foolish knight, that weenst with words</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To steale away that I with blowes have wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And brought through points of many perilous swords:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if thee list to see thy Courser ronne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or prove thy selfe, this sad encounter shonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seeke els without hazard of thy hedd.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At those prowd words that other knight begonne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wex exceeding wroth, and him aredd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To turne his steede about, or sure he should be dedd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Sith then,” (said Braggadochio) “needes thou wilt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy daies abridge through proofe of puissaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turne we our steeds; that both in equall tilt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May meete againe, and each take happy chaunce.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This said, they both a furlongs mountenaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Retird their steeds, to ronne in even race;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Braggadochio, with his bloody launce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Once having turnd, no more returnd his face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But lefte his love to losse, and fled him selfe apace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The knight, him seeing flie, had no regard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him to poursew, but to the lady rode;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And having her from Trompart lightly reard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his Courser sett the lovely lode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with her fled away without abode.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well weened he, that fairest Florimell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It was with whom in company he yode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so her selfe did alwaies to him tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So made him thinke him selfe in heven that was in hell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Florimell her selfe was far away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Driven to great distresse by fortune straunge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And taught the carefull Mariner to play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith late mischaunce had her compeld to chaunge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The land for sea, at randon there to raunge:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yett there that cruell Queene avengeresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not satisfyde so far her to estraunge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From courtly blis and wonted happinesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did heape on her new waves of weary wretchednesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For being fled into the fishers bote</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For refuge from the Monsters cruelty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long so she on the mighty maine did flote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with the tide drove forward carelesly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For th’ayre was milde and cleared was the skie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all his windes Dan Æolus did keepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From stirring up their stormy enmity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As pittying to see her waile and weepe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all the while the fisher did securely sleepe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last when droncke with drowsinesse he woke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saw his drover drive along the streame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He was dismayd; and thrise his brest he stroke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For marveill of that accident extreame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when he saw that blazing beauties beame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with rare light his bote did beautifye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He marveild more, and thought he yet did dreame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not well awakte; or that some extasye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Assotted had his sence, or dazed was his eye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when her well avizing hee perceiv’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be no vision nor fantasticke sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great comfort of her presence he conceiv’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And felt in his old corage new delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To gin awake, and stir his frosen spright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho rudely askte her, how she thither came?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Ah!” (sayd she) “father, I note read aright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What hard misfortune brought me to this same;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet am I glad that here I now in safety ame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But thou, good man, sith far in sea we bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the great waters gin apace to swell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That now no more we can the mayn-land see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have care, I pray, to guide the cock-bote well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least worse on sea then us on land befell.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereat th’old man did nought but fondly grin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saide his boat the way could wisely tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But his deceiptfull eyes did never lin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To looke on her faire face and marke her snowy skin.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The sight whereof in his congealed flesh</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Infixt such secrete sting of greedy lust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the drie withered stocke it gan refresh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And kindled heat that soone in flame forth brust:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The driest wood is soonest burnt to dust.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rudely to her he lept, and his rough hond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where ill became him rashly would have thrust;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she with angry scorne did him withstond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shamefully reproved for his rudenes fond.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But he, that never good nor maners knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her sharpe rebuke full litle did esteeme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hard is to teach an old horse amble trew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The inward smoke, that did before but steeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Broke into open fire and rage extreme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now he strength gan adde unto his will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forcyng to doe that did him fowle misseeme.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beastly he threwe her downe, ne car’d to spill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her garments gay with scales of fish that all did fill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The silly virgin strove him to withstand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All that she might, and him in vaine revild:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee strugled strongly both with foote and hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To save her honor from that villaine vilde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cride to heven, from humane help exild.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O! ye brave knights, that boast this Ladies love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where be ye now, when she is nigh defild</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of filthy wretch? well may she you reprove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of falsehood or of slouth, when most it may behove.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But if that thou, Sir Satyran, didst weete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or thou, Sir Peridure, her sory state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How soone would yee assemble many a fleete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To fetch from sea that ye at land lost late!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Towres, citties, kingdomes, ye would ruinate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In your avengement and despiteous rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought your burning fury mote abate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if Sir Calidore could it presage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No living creature could his cruelty asswage.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But sith that none of all her knights is nye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">See how the heavens, of voluntary grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soveraine favor towards chastity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe succor send to her distressed cace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So much high God doth innocence embrace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It fortuned, whilest thus she stifly strove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the wide sea importuned long space</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With shrilling shriekes, Proteus abrode did rove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along the fomy waves driving his finny drove.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Proteus is Shepheard of the seas of yore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hath the charge of Neptunes mighty heard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An aged sire with head all frory hore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sprinckled frost upon his deawy beard:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who when those pittifull outcries he heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through all the seas so ruefully resownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His charett swifte in hast he thither steard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with a teeme of scaly Phocas bownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was drawne upon the waves that fomed him arownd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And comming to that Fishers wandring bote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That went at will withouten card or sayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He therein saw that yrkesome sight, which smote</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deepe indignation and compassion frayle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into his hart attonce: streight did he hayle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The greedy villein from his hoped pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which he now did very litle fayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his staffe, that drives his heard astray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him bett so sore, that life and sence did much dismay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The whiles the pitteous Lady up did ryse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ruffled and fowly raid with filthy soyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And blubbred face with teares of her faire eyes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her heart nigh broken was with weary toyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To save her selfe from that outrageous spoyle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when she looked up, to weet what wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had her from so infamous fact assoyld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For shame, but more for feare of his grim sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Downe in her lap she hid her face, and lowdly shright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her selfe not saved yet from daunger dredd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She thought, but chaung’d from one to other feare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as a fearefull partridge, that is fledd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the sharpe hauke which her attached neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fals to ground to seeke for succor theare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereas the hungry Spaniells she does spye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With greedy jawes her ready for to teare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In such distresse and sad perplexity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was Florimell, when Proteus she did see her by.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But he endevored with speaches milde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her to recomfort, and accourage bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bidding her feare no more her foeman vilde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor doubt himselfe; and who he was her told:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet all that could not from affright her hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne to recomfort her at all prevayld;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For her faint hart was with the frosen cold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Benumbd so inly, that her wits nigh fayld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all her sences with abashment quite were quayld.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her up betwixt his rugged hands he reard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his frory lips full softly kist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles the cold ysickles from his rough beard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dropped adowne upon her yvory brest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet he him selfe so busily addrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her out of astonishment he wrought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And out of that same fishers filthy nest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Removing her, into his charet brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there with many gentle termes her faire besought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But that old leachour, which with bold assault</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That beautie durst presume to violate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He cast to punish for his hainous fault:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then tooke he him, yet trembling sith of late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tyde behind his charet, to aggrate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The virgin whom he had abusde so sore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So drag’d him through the waves in scornfull state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after cast him up upon the shore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Florimell with him unto his bowre he bore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His bowre is in the bottom of the maine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under a mightie rocke, gainst which doe rave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The roring billowes in their proud disdaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with the angry working of the wave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therein is eaten out an hollow cave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemes rough Masons hand with engines keene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had long while laboured it to engrave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There was his wonne; ne living wight was seene</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save one old Nymph, hight Panopè, to keepe it cleane.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thither he brought the sory Florimell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And entertained her the best he might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Panopè her entertaind eke well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As an immortall mote a mortall wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To winne her liking unto his delight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With flattering wordes he sweetly wooed her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And offered faire guiftes t’allure her sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she both offers and the offerer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Despysde, and all the fawning of the flatterer.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Dayly he tempted her with this or that,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And never suffred her to be at rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But evermore she him refused flat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all his fained kindnes did detest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So firmely she had sealed up her brest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes he boasted that a God he hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she a mortall creature loved best:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then he would make him selfe a mortall wight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But then she said she lov’d none, but a Faery knight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then like a Faerie knight him selfe he drest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For every shape on him he could endew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then like a king he was to her exprest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And offred kingdoms unto her in vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be his Leman and his Lady trew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when all this he nothing saw prevaile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With harder meanes he cast her to subdew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with sharpe threates her often did assayle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So thinking for to make her stubborne corage quayle.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To dreadfull shapes he did him selfe transforme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now like a Gyaunt; now like to a feend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then like a Centaure; then like to a storme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Raging within the waves: thereby he weend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her will to win unto his wished eend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when with feare, nor favour, nor with all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He els could doe, he saw him selfe esteemd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Downe in a Dongeon deepe he let her fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And threatned there to make her his eternall thrall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eternall thraldome was to her more liefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then losse of chastitie, or chaunge of love:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dye had she rather in tormenting griefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then any should of falsenesse her reprove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or loosenes, that she lightly did remove.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most vertuous virgin! glory be thy meed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And crowne of heavenly prayse with Saintes above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where most sweet hymmes of this thy famous deed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are still emongst them song, that far my rymes exceed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Fit song of Angels caroled to bee!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yet whatso my feeble Muse can frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shal be t’advance thy goodly chastitee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to enroll thy memorable name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In th’heart of every honourable Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they thy vertuous deedes may imitate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And be partakers of thy endlesse fame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yt yrkes me leave thee in this wofull state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tell of Satyrane where I him left of late.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who having ended with that Squyre of Dames</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A long discourse of his adventures vayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which himselfe then Ladies more defames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And finding not th’Hyena to be slayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that same Squyre retourned back againe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To his first way. And, as they forward went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They spyde a knight fay re pricking on the playne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if he were on some adventure bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in his port appeared manly hardiment.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sir Satyrane him towardes did addresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet what wight he was, and what his quest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, comming nigh, eftsoones he gan to gesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both by the burning hart which on his brest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He bare, and by the colours in his crest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Paridell it was. Tho to him yode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him saluting as beseemed best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan first inquire of tydinges farre abrode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And afterwardes on what adventure now he rode.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who thereto answering said: “The tydinges bad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which now in Faery court all men doe tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which turned hath great mirth to mourning sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is the late ruine of proud Marinell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And suddein parture of faire Florimell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To find him forth: and after her are gone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All the brave knightes that doen in armes excell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To savegard her ywandred all alone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Emongst the rest my lott (unworthy’) is to be one.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ah! gentle knight,” (said then Sir Satyrane)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Thy labour all is lost, I greatly dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hast a thanklesse service on thee ta’ne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And offrest sacrifice unto the dead:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For dead, I surely doubt, thou maist aread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Henceforth for ever Florimell to bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the noble knights of Maydenhead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which her ador’d, may sore repent with mee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all faire Ladies may for ever sory bee.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which wordes when Paridell had heard, his hew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan greatly chaunge and seemd dismaid to bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then said: “Fayre Sir, how may I weene it trew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ye doe tell in such uncerteintee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or speake ye of report, or did ye see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Just cause of dread, that makes ye doubt so sore?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, perdie, elles how mote it ever bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ever hand should dare for to engore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her noble blood? The hevens such crueltie abhore.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“These eyes did see that they will ever rew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T’have seene,” (quoth he) “when as a monstrous beast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Palfrey whereon she did travell slew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of his bowels made his bloody feast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which speaking token sheweth at the least</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her certeine losse, if not her sure decay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besides, that more suspicion encreast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I found her golden girdle cast astray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Distaynd with durt and blood, as relique of the pray.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ay me!” (said Paridell) “the signes be sadd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, but God turne the same to good sooth-say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Ladies safetie is sore to be dradd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet will I not forsake my forward way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till triall doe more certeine truth bewray.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Faire Sir,” (quoth he) “well may it you succeed!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne long shall Satyrane behind you stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to the rest, which in this Quest proceed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My labour adde, and be partaker of their speed.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ye noble knights,” (said then the Squyre of Dames)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Well may yee speede in so praiseworthy payne!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But sith the Sunne now ginnes to slake his beames</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In deawy vapours of the westerne mayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lose the teme out of his weary wayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mote not mislike you also to abate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your zealous hast, till morrow next againe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both light of heven and strength of men relate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which if ye please, to yonder castle turne your gate.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That counsell pleased well: so all yfere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth marched to a Castle them before;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where soone arryving they restrained were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of ready entraunce, which ought evermore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To errant knights be commune: wondrous sore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereat displeasd they were, till that young Squyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan them informe the cause, why that same dore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was shut to all which lodging did desyre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which to let you weet will further time requyre.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-9" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Malbecco will no straunge knights host,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">For peevish gealosie.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Paridell giusts with Britomart:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Both shew their anncestrie.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Redoubted knights, and honorable Dames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom I levell all my labours end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right sore I feare, least with unworthie blames</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This odious argument my rymes should shend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ought your goodly patience offend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles of a wanton Lady I doe write,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with her loose incontinence doth blend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The shyning glory of your soveraine light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And knighthood fowle defaced by a faithlesse knight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But never let th’ensample of the bad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Offend the good; for good, by paragone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of evill, may more notably be rad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As white seemes fayrer macht with blacke attone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne all are shamed by the fault of one:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For lo! in heven, whereas all goodnes is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emongst the Angels, a whole legione</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of wicked Sprightes did fall from happy blis;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What wonder then if one, of women all, did mis?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then listen, Lordings, if ye list to weet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cause why Satyrane and Paridell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mote not be entertaynd, as seemed meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into that Castle, (as that Squyre does tell.)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Therein a cancred crabbed Carle does dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That has no skill of Court nor courtesie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne cares what men say of him, ill or well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all his dayes he drownes in privitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet has full large to live and spend at libertie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But all his minde is set on mucky pelfe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hoord up heapes of evill gotten masse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which he others wrongs, and wreckes himselfe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet is he lincked to a lovely lasse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose beauty doth her bounty far surpasse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which to him both far unequall yeares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And also far unlike conditions has;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she does joy to play emongst her peares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to be free from hard restraynt and gealous feares.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But he is old, and withered like hay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unfit faire Ladies service to supply;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The privie guilt whereof makes him alway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Suspect her truth, and keepe continuall spy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon her with his other blincked eye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne suffreth he resort of living wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Approch to her, ne keepe her company,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in close bowre her mewes from all mens sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Depriv’d of kindly joy and naturall delight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Malbecco he, and Hellenore she hight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unfitly yokt together in one teeme.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is the cause why never any knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is suffred here to enter, but he seeme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as no doubt of him he neede misdeeme.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereat Sir Satyrane gan smyle, and say;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Extremely mad the man I surely deeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That weenes with watch and hard restraynt to stay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A womans will, which is disposd to go astray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“In vaine he feares that which he cannot shonne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For who wotes not, that womans subtiltyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can guylen Argus, when she list misdonne?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It is not yron bandes, nor hundred eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor brasen walls, nor many wakefull spyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That can withhold her wilfull wandring feet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But fast goodwill, with gentle courtesyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And timely service to her pleasures meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May her perhaps containe, that else would algates fleet.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Then is he not more mad,” (sayd Paridell)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“That hath himselfe unto such service sold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In dolefull thraldome all his dayes to dwell?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For sure a foole I doe him firmely hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That loves his fetters, though they were of gold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But why doe wee devise of others ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whyles thus we suffer this same dotard old</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To keepe us out in scorne, of his owne will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rather do not ransack all, and him selfe kill?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Nay, let us first” (sayd Satyrane) “entreat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The man by gentle meanes to let us in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And afterwardes affray with cruell threat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere that we to efforce it doe begin:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, if all fayle, we will by force it win,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke reward the wretch for his mesprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As may be worthy of his haynous sin.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That counsell pleasd: then Paridell did rise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the Castle gate approcht in quiet wise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whereat soft knocking entrance he desyrd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The good man selfe, which then the Porter playd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him answered, that all were now retyrd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto their rest, and all the keyes convayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto their maister, who in bed was layd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none him durst awake out of his dreme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therefore them of patience gently prayd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Paridell began to chaunge his theme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And threatned him with force and punishment extreme:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But all in vaine, for nought mote him relent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now so long before the wicket fast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They wayted, that the night was forward spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the faire welkin fowly overcast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan blowen up a bitter stormy blast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With showre and hayle so horrible and dred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That this faire many were compeld at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To fly for succour to a little shed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which beside the gate for swyne was ordered.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It fortuned, soone after they were gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another knight, whom tempest thither brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came to that Castle, and with earnest mone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as the rest, late entrance deare besought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, like so as the rest, he prayd for nought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For flatly he of entrance was refusd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sorely thereat he was displeased, and thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How to avenge himselfe so sore abusd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And evermore the Carle of courtesie accusd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, to avoyde th’intolerable stowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He was compeld to seeke some refuge neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to that shed, to shrowd him from the showre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He came, which full of guests he found whyleare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So as he was not let to enter there:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat he gan to wex exceeding wroth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And swore that he would lodge with them yfere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or them dislodge, all were they liefe or loth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so defyde them each, and so defyde them both.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Both were full loth to leave that needfull tent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both full loth in darkenesse to debate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet both full liefe him lodging to have lent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both full liefe his boasting to abate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But chiefely Paridell his hart did grate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To heare him threaten so despightfully,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if he did a dogge in kenell rate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That durst not barke; and rather had he dy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, when he was defyde, in coward corner ly.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho hastily remounting to his steed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He forth issew’d: like as a boystrous winde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which in th’earthes hollow caves hath long ben hid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shut up fast within her prisons blind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Makes the huge element, against her kinde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To move and tremble as it were aghast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill that it an issew forth may finde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then forth it breakes, and with his furious blast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Confounds both land and seas, and skyes doth overcast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Their steel-hed speares they strongly coucht, and met</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Together with impetuous rage and forse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with the terrour of their fierce affret</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They rudely drove to ground both man and horse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That each awhile lay like a sencelesse corse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Paridell sore brused with the blow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could not arise the counterchaunge to scorse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that young Squyre him reared from below;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then drew he his bright sword, and gan about him throw.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Satyrane forth stepping did them stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with faire treaty pacifide their yre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, when they were accorded from the fray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against that Castles Lord they gan conspire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To heape on him dew vengeaunce for his hire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They beene agreed; and to the gates they goe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To burn the same with unquenchable fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that uncurteous Carle, their commune foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To doe fowle death to die, or wrap in grievous woe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Malbecco, seeing them resolvd indeed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To flame the gates, and hearing them to call</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For fire in earnest, ran with fearfull speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to them calling from the castle wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besought them humbly him to beare withall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As ignorant of servants bad abuse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And slacke attendaunce unto straungers call.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The knights were willing all things to excuse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though nought belev’d, and entraunce late did not refuse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They beene ybrought into a comely bowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And servd of all things that mote needfull bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet secretly their hoste did on them lowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And welcomde more for feare then charitee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But they dissembled what they did not see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And welcomed themselves. Each gan undight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their garments wett, and weary armour free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To dry them selves by Vulcanes flaming light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke their lately bruzed parts to bring in plight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And eke that straunger knight emongst the rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was for like need enforst to disaray:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, whenas vailed was her lofty crest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her golden locks, that were in trammells gay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upbounden, did them selves adowne display</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And raught unto her heeles; like sunny beames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in a cloud their light did long time stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their vapour vaded, shewe their golden gleames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And through the persant aire shoote forth their azure streames.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Shee also dofte her heavy haberjeon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which the faire feature of her limbs did hyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her well-plighted frock, which she did won</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tucke about her short when she did ryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee low let fall, that flowd from her lanck syde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Downe to her foot with carelesse modestee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then of them all she plainly was espyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be a woman-wight, unwist to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fairest woman-wight that ever eie did see.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like as Bellona (being late returnd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From slaughter of the Giaunts conquered:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where proud Encelade, whose wide nosethrils burnd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With breathed flames, like to a furnace redd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Transfixed with her speare downe tombled dedd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From top of Hemus by him heaped hye;)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath loosd her helmet from her lofty hedd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her Gorgonian shield gins to untye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From her lefte arme, to rest in glorious victorye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which whenas they beheld, they smitten were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With great amazement of so wondrous sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And each on other, and they all on her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stood gazing, as if suddein great affright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had them surprizd. At last, avizing right</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her goodly personage and glorious hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which they so much mistooke, they tooke delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In their first error, and yett still anew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With wonder of her beauty fed their hongry vew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet note their hongry vew be satisfide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But seeing still the more desir’d to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever firmely fixed did abide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In contemplation of divinitee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But most they mervaild at her chevalree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And noble prowesse, which they had approv’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That much they faynd to know who she mote bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet none of all them her thereof amov’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet every one her likte, and every one her lov’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And Paridell, though partly discontent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his late fall and fowle indignity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was soone wonne his malice to relent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through gratious regard of her faire eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And knightly worth which he too late did try,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet tried did adore. Supper was dight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then they Malbecco prayd of courtesy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of his lady they might have the sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And company at meat, to doe them more delight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But he, to shifte their curious request,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan causen why she could not come in place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her erased helth, her late recourse to rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And humid evening ill for sicke folkes cace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But none of those excuses could take place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne would they eate till she in presence came.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee came in presence with right comely grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fairely them saluted, as became,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shewd her selfe in all a gentle courteous Dame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They sate to meat; and Satyrane his chaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was her before, and Paridell beside;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he him selfe sate looking still askaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst Britomart, and ever closely eide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir Satyrane, that glaunces might not glide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But his blinde eie, that sided Paridell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All his demeasnure from his sight did hide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On her faire face so did he feede his fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sent close messages of love to her at will.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And ever and anone, when none was ware,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With speaking lookes, that close embassage bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He rov’d at her, and told his secret care;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all that art he learned had of yore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne was she ignoraunt of that leud lore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in his eye his meaning wisely redd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with the like him aunswerd evermore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee sent at him one fyrie dart, whose hedd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Empoisned was with privy lust and gealous dredd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He from that deadly throw made no defence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to the wound his weake heart opened wyde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wicked engine through false influence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Past through his eies, and secretly did glyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into his heart, which it did sorely gryde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But nothing new to him was that same paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne paine at all; for he so ofte had tryde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The powre thereof, and lov’d so oft in vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thing of course he counted love to entertaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thenceforth to her he sought to intimate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His inward griefe, by meanes to him well knowne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now Bacchus fruit out of the silver plate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He on the table dasht, as overthrowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or of the fruitfull liquor overflowne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by the dauncing bubbles did divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or therein write to lett his love be showne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which well she redd out of the learned line:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sacrament prophane in mistery of wine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, when so of his hand the pledge she raught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The guilty cup she fained to mistake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in her lap did shed her idle draught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shewing desire her inward flame to slake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By such close signes they secret way did make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto their wils, and one eies watch escape:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two eies he needeth, for to watch and wake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who lovers will deceive. Thus was the ape,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By their faire handling, put into Malbeccoes cape.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now, when of meats and drinks they had their fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Purpose was moved by that gentle Dame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto those knights adventurous, to tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of deeds of armes which unto them became,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every one his kindred and his name.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Paridell, in whom a kindly pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of gratious speach and skill his words to frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abounded, being glad of so fitte tide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him to commend to her, thus spake, of al well eide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Troy, that art now nought but an idle name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in thine ashes buried low dost lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though whilome far much greater then thy fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before that angry Gods and cruell skie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon thee heapt a direfull destinie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What boots it boast thy glorious descent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fetch from heven thy great genealogie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith all thy worthie prayses being blent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their ofspring hath embaste, and later glory shent?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Most famous Worthy of the world, by whome</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That warre was kindled which did Troy inflame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stately towres of Ilion whilome</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Brought unto balefull ruine, was by name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir Paris far renowmd through noble fame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, through great prowesse and bold hardinesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From Lacedæmon fetcht the fayrest Dame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ever Greece did boast, or knight possesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom Venus to him gave for meed of worthinesse;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Fayre Helene, flowre of beautie excellent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And girlond of the mighty Conquerours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That madest many Ladies deare lament</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The heavie losse of their brave Paramours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which they far off beheld from Trojan toures,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saw the fieldes of faire Scamander strowne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With carcases of noble warrioures</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose fruitlesse lives were under furrow sowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Xanthus sandy bankes with blood all overflowne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“From him my linage I derive aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who long before the ten yeares siege of Troy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles yet on Ida he a shepeheard hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On faire Oenone got a lovely boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom, for remembrance of her passed joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She, of his Father, Parius did name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, after Greekes did Priams realme destroy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gathred the Trojan reliques sav’d from flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with them sayling thence to th’isle of Paros came.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“That was by him cald Paros, which before</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hight Nausa: there he many yeares did raine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And built Nausicle by the Pontick shore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which he dying lefte next in remaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Paridas his sonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whom I Paridell by kin descend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, for faire ladies love and glories gaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My native soile have lefte, my dayes to spend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In seewing deeds of armes, my lives and labors end.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whenas the noble Britomart heard tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Trojan warres and Priams citie sackt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The ruefull story of Sir Paridell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She was empassiond at that piteous act,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With zelous envy of Greekes cruell fact</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against that nation, from whose race of old</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She heard that she was lineally extract;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For noble Britons sprong from Trojans bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Troynovant was built of old Troyes ashes cold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then, sighing soft awhile, at last she thus:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“O lamentable fall of famous towne!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which raignd so many yeares victorious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of all Asie bore the soveraine crowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In one sad night consumd and throwen downe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What stony hart, that heares thy haplesse fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is not empierst with deepe compassiowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And makes ensample of mans wretched state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That floures so fresh at morne, and fades at evening late?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Behold, Sir, how your pitifull complaint</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath fownd another partner of your payne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For nothing may impresse so deare constraint</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As countries cause, and commune foes disdayne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if it should not grieve you backe agayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To turne your course, I would to heare desyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What to Aeneas fell; sith that men sayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He was not in the cities wofull fyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Consum’d, but did him selfe to safety retyre.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Anchyses sonne, begott of Venus fayre,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said he, “out of the flames for safegard fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with a remnant did to sea repayre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where he through fatall errour long was led</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full many yeares, and weetlesse wandered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From shore to shore emongst the Lybick sandes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere rest he fownd. Much there he suffered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many perilles past in forreine landes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To save his people sad from victours vengefull handes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“At last in Latium he did arryve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where he with cruell warre was entertaind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of th’inland folke, which sought him backe to drive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till he with old Latinus was constraind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To contract wedlock, (so the fates ordaind)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wedlocke contract in blood, and eke in blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Accomplished, that many deare complaind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rivall slaine, the victour, through the flood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Escaped hardly, hardly praisd his wedlock good.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Yet, after all, he victour did survive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with Latinus did the kingdom part;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But after, when both nations gan to strive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into their names the title to convart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His sonne Iülus did from thence depart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all the warlike youth of Trojans bloud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in long Alba plast his throne apart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where faire it florished and long time stoud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till Romulus, renewing it, to Rome remoud.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“There; there,” (said Britomart) “afresh appeard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The glory of the later world to spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Troy againe out of her dust was reard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sitt in second seat of soveraine king</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the world, under her governing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But a third kingdom yet is to arise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the Trojans scattered ofspring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in all glory and great enterprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both first and second Troy shall dare to equalise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“It Troynovant is hight, that with the waves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of wealthy Thamis washed is along,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon whose stubborne neck, (whereat he raves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With roring rage, and sore him selfe does throng)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all men feare to tempt his billowes strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She fastned hath her foot; which stands so hy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it a wonder of the world is song</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In forreine lands; and all which passen by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beholding it from farre, doe thinke it threates the skye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The Trojan Brute did first that citie fownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Hygate made the meare thereof by West,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Overt gate by North: that is the bownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Toward the land; two rivers bownd the rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So huge a scope at first him seemed best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be the compasse of his kingdomes seat:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So huge a mind could not in lesser rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne in small meares containe his glory great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Albion had conquered first by warlike feat.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ah! fairest Lady knight,” (said Paridell)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Pardon, I pray, my heedlesse oversight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who had forgot that whylome I heard tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From aged Mnemon; for my wits beene light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Indeed he said, (if I remember right)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of the antique Trojan stocke there grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another plant, that raught to wondrous hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And far abroad his mightie braunches threw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the utmost Angle of the world he knew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“For that same Brute, whom much he did advaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In all his speach, was Sylvius his sonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom having slain through luckles arrowes glaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He fled for feare of that he had misdonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or els for shame, so fowle reproch to shonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with him ledd to sea an youthly trayne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where wearie wandring they long time did wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many fortunes prov’d in th’Ocean mayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And great adventures found, that now were long to sayne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“At last by fatall course they driven were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into an Island spatious and brode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The furthest North that did to them appeare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, after rest, they, seeking farre abrode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Found it the fittest soyle for their abode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fruitfull of all thinges fitt for living foode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wholy waste and void of peoples trode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save an huge nation of the Geaunts broode</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That fed on living flesh, and dronck mens vitall blood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Whom he, through wearie wars and labours long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Subdewd with losse of many Britons bold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which the great Goemagot of strong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Corineus, and Coulin of Debon old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were overthrowne and laide on th’earth full cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which quaked under their so hideous masse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A famous history to bee enrold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In everlasting moniments of brasse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all the antique Worthies merits far did passe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“His worke great Troynovant, his worke is eke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Lincolne, both renowmed far away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That who from East to West will endlong seeke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cannot two fairer Cities find this day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Except Cleopolis: so heard I say</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Old Mnemon. Therefore, Sir, I greet you well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your countrey kin; and you entyrely pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of pardon for the strife, which late befell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Betwixt us both unknowne.” So ended Paridell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But all the while that he these speeches spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his lips hong faire Dame Hellenore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With vigilant regard and dew attent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fashioning worldes of fancies evermore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In her fraile witt, that now her quite forlore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles unwares away her wondring eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And greedy eares her weake hart from her bore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he perceiving, ever privily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In speaking many false belgardes at her let fly.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So long these knights discoursed diversly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of straunge affaires, and noble hardiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which they had past with mickle jeopardy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That now the humid night was farforth spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hevenly lampes were halfendeale ybrent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which th’old man seeing wel, who too long thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Every discourse, and every argument,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which by the houres he measured, besought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Them go to rest. So all unto their bowres were brought.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-10" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Paridell rapeth Hellenore:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Malbecco her pursewes:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Findes emongst Satyres whence with him</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To tume she doth refuse.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The morow next, so soone as Phœbus Lamp</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bewrayed had the world with early light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fresh Aurora had the shady damp</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the goodly heven amoved quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Britomart and that same Faery knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uprose, forth on their journey for to wend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Paridell complaynd, that his late fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Britomart so sore did him offend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ryde he could not, till his hurts he did amend.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So foorth they far’d; but he behind them stayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Maulgre his host, who grudged grievously</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To house a guest that would be needes obayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of his owne him lefte not liberty:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might wanting measure moveth surquedry.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two things he feared, but the third was death;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That fiers youngmans unruly maystery;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His money, which he lov’d as living breath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his faire wife, whom honest long he kept uneath.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But patience perforce, he must abie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What fortune and his fate on him will lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fond is the feare that findes no remedie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet warily he watcheth every way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which he feareth evill happen may;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So th’evill thinkes by watching to prevent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne doth he suffer her, nor night nor day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of his sight her selfe once to absent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So doth he punish her, and eke him selfe torment.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Paridell kept better watch then hee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A fit occasion for his turne to finde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">False love! why do men say thou canst not see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in their foolish fancy feigne thee blinde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with thy charmes the sharpest sight doest binde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to thy will abuse? Thou walkest free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seest every secret of the minde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou seest all, yet none at all sees thee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All that is by the working of thy Deitee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So perfect in that art was Paridell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he Malbeccoes halfen eye did wyle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His halfen eye he wiled wondrous well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Hellenors both eyes did eke beguyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both eyes and hart attonce, during the whyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he there sojourned his woundes to heale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Cupid selfe, it seeing, close did smyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet how he her love away did steale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bad that none their joyous treason should reveale.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The learned lover lost no time nor tyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That least avantage mote to him afford,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet bore so faire a sayle, that none espyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His secret drift, till he her layd abord.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When so in open place and commune bord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He fortun’d her to meet, with commune speach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He courted her; yet bayted every word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That his ungentle hoste n’ote him appeach</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of vile ungentlenesse, or hospitages breach.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when apart (if ever her apart)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He found, then his false engins fast he plyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the sleights unbosomd in his hart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He sigh’d, he sobd, he swownd, he perdy dyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cast himselfe on ground her fast besyde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, when againe he him bethought to live,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He wept, and wayld, and false laments belyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saying, but if she Mercie would him give,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he mote algates dye, yet did his death forgive.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And otherwhyles with amorous delights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pleasing toyes he would her entertaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now singing sweetly to surprize her sprights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now making layes of love and lovers paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bransles, Ballads, virelayes, and verses vaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oft purposes, oft riddles, he devysd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thousands like which flowed in his braine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which he fed her fancy, and entysd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To take to his new love, and leave her old despysd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And every where he might, and everie while,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He did her service dewtifull, and sewd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At hand with humble pride and pleasing guile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So closely yet, that none but she it vewd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who well perceived all, and all indewd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus finely did he his false nets dispred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which he many weake harts had subdewd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of yore, and many had ylike misled:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What wonder then, if she were likewise carried?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>No fort so fensible, no wals so strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that continuall battery will rive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or daily siege, through dispurvayaunce long</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lacke of reskewes, will to parley drive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Peece, that unto parley eare will give,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will shortly yield it selfe, and will be made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The vassall of the victors will bylive:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That stratageme had oftentimes assayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This crafty Paramoure, and now it plaine display’d:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For through his traines he her intrapped hath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she her love and hart hath wholy sold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To him, without regard of gaine or scath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or care of credite, or of husband old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom she hath vow’d to dub a fayre Cucquold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nought wants but time and place, which shortly shee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Devized hath, and to her lover told.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It pleased well: So well they both agree:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So readie rype to ill ill wemens counsels bee!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Darke was the Evening, fit for lovers stealth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When chaunst Malbecco busie be elsewhere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She to his closet went, where all his wealth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lay hid; thereof she countlesse summes did reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which she meant away with her to beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rest she fyr’d, for sport, or for despight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Hellene, when she saw aloft appeare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Trojane flames and reach to hevens hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did clap her hands, and joyed at that dolefull sight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This second Helene, fay re Dame Hellenore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles her husband ran with sory haste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To quench the flames which she had tyn’d before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Laught at his foolish labour spent in waste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ran into her lovers armes right fast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where streight embraced she to him did cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And call alowd for helpe, ere helpe were past;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For lo! that Guest did beare her forcibly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And meant to ravish her, that rather had to dy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The wretched man hearing her call for ayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ready seeing him with her to fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his disquiet mind was much dismayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when againe he backeward cast his eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saw the wicked fire so furiously</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Consume his hart, and scorch his Idoles face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He was therewith distressed diversely,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne wist he how to turne, nor to what place:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was never wretched man in such a wofull cace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ay when to him she cryde, to her he turnd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And left the fire; love money overcame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when he marked how his money burnd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He left his wife; money did love disclame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both was he loth to loose his loved Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And loth he leave his liefest pelfe behinde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, sith he n’ote save both, he sav’d that same</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which was the dearest to his dounghill minde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The God of his desire, the joy of misers blinde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus whilest all things in troublous uprore were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all men busie to suppresse the flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The loving couple neede no reskew feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But leasure had and liberty to frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their purpost flight, free from all mens reclame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Night, the patronesse of love-stealth fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gave them safe conduct, till to end they came.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So beene they gone yfere, a wanton payre</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of lovers loosely knit, where list them to repayre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as the cruell flames yslaked were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Malbecco, seeing how his losse did lye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the flames which he had quencht whylere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into huge waves of griefe and gealosye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full deepe emplonged was, and drowned nye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Twixt inward doole and felonous despight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He rav’d, he wept, he stampt, he lowd did cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the passions that in man may light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did him attonce oppresse, and vex his caytive spright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Long thus he chawd the cud of inward griefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did consume his gall with anguish sore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still when he mused on his late mischiefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then still the smart thereof increased more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seemd more grievous then it was before.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last when sorrow he saw booted nought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne griefe might not his love to him restore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan devise how her he reskew mought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ten thousand wayes he cast in his confused thought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last resolving, like a Pilgrim pore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To search her forth where so she might be fond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bearing with him treasure in close store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rest he leaves in ground: So takes in hond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke her endlong both by sea and lond.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long he her sought, he sought her far and nere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every where that he mote understond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of knights and ladies any meetings were;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of each one he mett he tidings did inquere.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But all in vaine: his woman was too wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ever to come into his clouch againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hee too simple ever to surprise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The jolly Paridell, for all his paine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One day, as hee forpassed by the plaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With weary pace, he far away espide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A couple, seeming well to be his twaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which hoved close under a forest side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if they lay in wait, or els them selves did hide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Well weened hee that those the same mote bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as he better did their shape avize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him seemed more their maner did agree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For th’one was armed all in warlike wize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom to be Paridell he did devize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And th’other, al yclad in garments light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Discolourd like to womanish disguise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He did resemble to his lady bright;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ever his faint hart much earned at the sight:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And ever faine he towards them would goe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yet durst not for dread approchen nie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But stood aloofe, unweeting what to doe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that prickt forth with loves extremity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is the father of fowle gealosy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He closely nearer crept the truth to weet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, as he nigher drew, he easily</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might scerne that it was not his sweetest sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne yet her Belamour, the partner of his sheet:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But it was scornefull Braggadochio,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with his servant Trompart hoverd there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith late he fled from his too earnest foe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom such whenas Malbecco spyed clere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He turned backe, and would have fled arere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till Trompart, ronning hastely, him did stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bad before his soveraine Lord appere.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was him loth, yet durst he not gainesay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And comming him before low louted on the lay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Boaster at him sternely bent his browe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if he could have kild him with his looke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to the ground him meekely made to bowe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And awfull terror deepe into him strooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That every member of his body quooke.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said he, “Thou man of nought, what doest thou here</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unfitly furnisht with thy bag and booke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where I expected one with shield and spere</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To prove some deeds of armes upon an equall pere?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The wretched man at his imperious speach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was all abasht, and low prostrating said:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Good Sir, let not my rudenes be no breach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto your patience, ne be ill ypaid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For I unwares this way by fortune straid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A silly Pilgrim driven to distresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seeke a Lady”⁠—There he suddein staid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did the rest with grievous sighes suppresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While teares stood in his eies, few drops of bitternesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“What Lady, man?” (said Trompart) “take good hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tell thy griefe, if any hidden lye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was never better time to shew thy smart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then now that noble succor is thee by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is the whole worlds commune remedy.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That chearful word his weak heart much did cheare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with vaine hope his spirits faint supply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That bold he sayd; “O most redoubted Pere!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vouchsafe with mild regard a wretches cace to heare.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then sighing sore, “It is not long,” (saide hee)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Sith I enjoyd the gentlest Dame alive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whom a knight, no knight at all perdee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But shame of all that doe for honor strive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By treacherous deceipt did me deprive:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through open outrage he her bore away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with fowle force unto his will did drive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which al good knights, that armes doe bear this day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are bownd for to revenge, and punish if they may.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And you, most noble Lord, that can and dare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Redresse the wrong of miserable wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cannot employ your most victorious speare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In better quarell then defence of right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for a Lady gainst a faithlesse knight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So shall your glory bee advaunced much,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all faire Ladies magnify your might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke my selfe, albee I simple such,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your worthy paine shall wel reward with guerdon rich.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that out of his bouget forth he drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great store of treasure, therewith him to tempt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he on it lookt scornefully askew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As much disdeigning to be so misdempt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or a war-monger to be basely nempt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sayd; “Thy offers base I greatly loth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arid eke thy words uncourteous and unkempt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I tread in dust thee and thy money both,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, were it not for shame”⁠—So turned from him wroth.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Trompart, that his maistres humor knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In lofty looks to hide an humble minde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was inly tickled with that golden vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his eare him rownded close behinde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet stoupt he not, but lay still in the winde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Waiting advauntage on the pray to sease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till Trompart, lowly to the grownd inclinde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besought him his great corage to appease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pardon simple man that rash did him displease.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Big looking like a doughty Doucepere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last he thus; “Thou clod of vilest clay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I pardon yield, and with thy rudenes beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But weete henceforth, that all that golden pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all that els the vaine world vaunten may,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I loath as doung, ne deeme my dew reward:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fame is my meed, and glory vertues pay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But minds of mortall men are muchell mard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mov’d amisse with massy mucks unmeet regard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And more: I graunt to thy great misery</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gratious respect; thy wife shall backe be sent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that vile knight, who ever that he bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which hath thy lady reft and knighthood shent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By Sanglamort my sword, whose deadly dent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The blood hath of so many thousands shedd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I sweare, ere long shall dearely it repent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne he twixt heven and earth shall hide his hedd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But soone he shal be fownd, and shortly doen be dedd.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The foolish man thereat woxe wondrous blith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if the word so spoken were halfe donne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And humbly thanked him a thousand sith</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That had from death to life him newly wonne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho forth the Boaster marching brave begonne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His stolen steed to thunder furiously,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if he heaven and hell would over-ronne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the world confound with cruelty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That much Malbecco joyed in his jollity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus long they three together traveiled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through many a wood and many an uncouth way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke his wife that was far wandered:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But those two sought nought but the present pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weete, the treasure which he did bewray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which their eies and harts were wholly sett,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With purpose how they might it best betray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, sith the howre that first he did them lett</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The same behold, therwith their keene desires were whett.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It fortuned, as they together far’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They spide where Paridell came pricking fast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the plaine; the which him selfe prepar’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To giust with that brave straunger knight a cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As on adventure by the way he past.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alone he rode without his Paragone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, having, filcht her bells, her up he cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the wide world, and lett her fly alone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He nould be clogd. So had he served many one.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The gentle Lady, loose at randon lefte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The greene-wood long did walke, and wander wide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At wilde adventure, like a forlorne wefte;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till on a day the Satyres her espide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Straying alone withouten groome or guide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her up they tooke, and with them home her ledd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With them as housewife ever to abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To milk their gotes, and make them cheese and bredd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every one as commune good her handeled:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That shortly she Malbecco has forgott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke Sir Paridell, all were he deare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who from her went to seeke another lott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now by fortune was arrived here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where those two guilers with Malbecco were.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone as the old man saw Sir Paridell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He fainted, and was almost dead with feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne word he had to speake his griefe to tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to him louted low, and greeted goodly well;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, after, asked him for Hellenore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“I take no keepe of her,” (sayd Paridell)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“She wonneth in the forrest there before.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So forth he rode as his adventure fell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles the Boaster from his loftie sell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faynd to alight, something amisse to mend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the fresh Swayne would not his leasure dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But went his way: whom when he passed kend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He up remounted light, and after faind to wend.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Perdy, nay,” (said Malbecco) “shall ye not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But let him passe as lightly as he came:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For litle good of him is to be got,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mickle perill to bee put to shame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But let us goe to seeke my dearest Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom he hath left in yonder forest wyld;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For of her safety in great doubt I ame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least salvage beastes her person have despoyld:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then all the world is lost, and we in vaine have toyld.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They all agree, and forward them addresse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Ah! but,” (said crafty Trompart) “weete ye well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That yonder in that wastefull wildernesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Huge monsters haunt, and many dangers dwell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dragons, and Minotaures, and feendes of hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many wilde woodmen which robbe and rend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All traveilers: therefore advise ye well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before ye enterprise that way to wend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One may his journey bring too soone to evill end.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Malbecco stopt in great astonishment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with pale eyes fast fixed on the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their counsell crav’d in daunger imminent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said Trompart; “You, that are the most opprest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With burdein of great treasure, I thinke best</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here for to stay in safetie behynd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Lord and I will search the wide forest.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That counsell pleased not Malbeccoes mynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he was much afraid him selfe alone to fynd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Then is it best,” (said he) “that ye doe leave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your treasure here in some security,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Either fast closed in some hollow greave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or buried in the ground from jeopardy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till we returne againe in safety:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As for us two, least doubt of us ye have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hence farre away we will blyndfolded ly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne privy bee unto your treasures grave.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It pleased; so he did. Then they march forward brave.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now, when amid the thickest woodes they were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They heard a noyse of many bagpipes shrill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shrieking Hububs them approching nere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which all the forest did with horrour fill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That dreadfull sound the bosters hart did thrill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With such amazment, that in hast he fledd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever looked back for good or ill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after him eke fearefull Trompart spedd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The old man could not fly, but fell to ground half dedd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet afterwardes, close creeping as he might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He in a bush did hyde his fearefull hedd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The jolly Satyres, full of fresh delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came dauncing forth, and with them nimbly ledd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Helenore with girlonds all bespredd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom their May-lady they had newly made:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She, proude of that new honour which they redd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of their lovely fellowship full glade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Daunst lively, and her face did with a Lawrell shade.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The silly man that in the thickett lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saw all this goodly sport, and grieved sore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet durst he not against it doe or say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But did his hart with bitter thoughts engore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see th’unkindnes of his Hellenore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All day they daunced with great lusty-hedd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with their horned feet the greene gras wore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles their Gotes upon the brouzes fedd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till drouping Phœbus gan to hyde his golden hedd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho up they gan their mery pypes to trusse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all their goodly heardes did gather rownd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But every Satyre first did give a busse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Hellenore; so busses did abound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now gan the humid vapour shed the grownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With perly deaw, and th’Earthes gloomy shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did dim the brightnesse of the welkin rownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That every bird and beast awarned made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To shrowd themselves, whiles sleepe their sences did invade.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when Malbecco saw, out of the bush</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his handes and feete he crept full light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And like a Gote emongst the Gotes did rush;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, through the helpe of his faire hornes on hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And misty dampe of misconceyving night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke through likenesse of his gotish beard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He did the better counterfeite aright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So home he marcht emongst the horned heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That none of all the Satyres him espyde or heard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At night, when all they went to sleepe, he vewd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereas his lovely wife emongst them lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Embraced of a Satyre rough and rude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who all the night did minde his joyous play:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nine times he heard him come aloft ere day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all his hart with gealosy did swell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yet that nights ensample did bewray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That not for nought his wife them loved so well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When one so oft a night did ring his matins bell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So closely as he could he to them crept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When wearie of their sport to sleepe they fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to his wife, that now full soundly slept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He whispered in her eare, and did her tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it was he which by her side did dwell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therefore prayd her wake to heare him plaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one out of a dreame not waked well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She turnd her, and returned backe againe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet her for to awake he did the more constraine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last with irkesom trouble she abrayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then perceiving that it was indeed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her old Malbecco, which did her upbrayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With loosenesse of her love and loathly deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She was astonisht with exceeding dreed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And would have wakt the Satyre by her syde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he her prayd, for mercy or for meed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To save his life, ne let him be descryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But hearken to his lore, and all his counsell hyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho gan he her perswade to leave that lewd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And loathsom life, of God and man abhord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And home returne, where all should be renewd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With perfect peace and bandes of fresh accord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And she receivd againe to bed and bord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if no trespas ever had beene donne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she it all refused at one word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by no meanes would to his will be wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But chose emongst the jolly Satyres still to wonne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He wooed her till day-spring he espyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all in vaine; and then turnd to the heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who butted him with hornes on every syde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And trode downe in the durt, where his hore beard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was fowly dight, and he of death afeard.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Early, before the heavens fairest light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the ruddy East was fully reard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The heardes out of their foldes were loosed quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he emongst the rest crept forth in sory plight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So soone as he the Prison-dore did pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He ran as fast as both his feet could beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And never looked who behind him was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne scarsely who before: like as a Beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That creeping close amongst the hives to reare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An hony-combe, the wakefull dogs espy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him assayling sore his carkas teare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hardly he with life away does fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne stayes, till safe him selfe he see from jeopardy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne stayd he, till he came unto the place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where late his treasure he entombed had;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where when he found it not, (for Trompart bace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had it purloyned for his maister bad)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With extreme fury he became quite mad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ran away, ran with him selfe away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That who so straungely had him seene bestadd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With upstart haire and staring eyes dismay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Limbo lake him late escaped sure would say.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>High over hilles and over dales he fledd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if the wind him on his winges had borne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne banck nor bush could stay him, when he spedd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His nimble feet, as treading still on thorne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Griefe, and despight, and gealosy, and scorne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did all the way him follow hard behynd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he himselfe himselfe loath’d so forlorne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So shamefully forlorne of womankynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, as a Snake, still lurked in his wounded mynd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Still fled he forward, looking backward still;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne stayd his flight nor fearefull agony,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that he came unto a rocky hill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over the sea suspended dreadfully,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That living creature it would terrify</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To looke adowne, or upward to the hight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From thence he threw him selfe despiteously,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All desperate of his fore-damned spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That seemd no help for him was left in living sight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But through long anguish and selfe-murdring thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He was so wasted and forpined quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all his substance was consum’d to nought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And nothing left but like an aery Spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That on the rockes he fell so flit and light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he thereby receiv’d no hurt at all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But chaunced on a craggy cliff to light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence he with crooked clawes so long did crall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That at the last he found a cave with entrance small.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Into the same he creepes, and thenceforth there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Resolv’d to build his balefull mansion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In drery darkenes and continuall feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that rocks fall, which ever and anon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Threates with huge ruine him to fall upon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he dare never sleepe, but that one eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still ope he keepes for that occasion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever rests he in tranquillity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The roring billowes beat his bowre so boystrously.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne ever is he wont on ought to feed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But todes and frogs, his pasture poysonous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which in his cold complexion doe breed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A filthy blood, or humour rancorous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Matter of doubt and dread suspitious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That doth with curelesse care consume the hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Corrupts the stomacke with gall vitious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cros-cuts the liver with internall smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And doth transfixe the soule with deathes eternall dart.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet can he never dye, but dying lives,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doth himselfe with sorrow new sustaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That death and life attonce unto him gives,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And painefull pleasure turnes to pleasing paine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There dwels he ever, miserable swaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hatefull both to him selfe and every wight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where he, through privy griefe and horrour vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is woxen so deform’d that he has quight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgot he was a man, and Gelosy is hight.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-11" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Britomart chaceth Ollyphant;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Findes Scudamour distrest:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Assayes the house of Busyrane,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Where Loves spoyles are exprest.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>O hatefull hellish Snake! what furie furst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Brought thee from balefull house of Proserpine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where in her bosome she thee long had nurst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fostred up with bitter milke of tine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fowle Gealosy! that turnest love divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To joylesse dread, and mak’st the loving hart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hatefull thoughts to languish and to pine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And feed it selfe with selfe-consuming smart?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the passions in the mind thou vilest art!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O! let him far be banished away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his stead let Love for ever dwell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sweete Love, that doth his golden wings embay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In blessed Nectar and pure Pleasures well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untroubled of vile feare or bitter fell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ye, faire Ladies, that your kingdomes make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In th’harts of men, them governe wisely well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of faire Britomart ensample take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That was as trew in love as Turtle to her make.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who with Sir Satyrane, as earst ye red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth ryding from Malbeccoes hostlesse hous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far off aspyde a young man, the which fled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From an huge Geaunt, that with hideous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hatefull outrage long him chaced thus;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It was that Ollyphant, the brother deare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that Argantè vile and vitious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whom the Squyre of Dames was reft whylere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This all as bad as she, and worse, if worse ought were.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For as the sister did in feminine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And filthy lust exceede all womankinde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So he surpassed his sex masculine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In beastly use, all that I ever finde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when as Britomart beheld behinde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fearefull boy so greedily poursew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She was emmoved in her noble minde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T’employ her puissaunce to his reskew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pricked fiercely forward where she did him vew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne was Sir Satyrane her far behinde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with like fiercenesse did ensew the chace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when the Gyaunt saw, he soone resinde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His former suit, and from them fled apace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They after both, and boldly bad him bace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And each did strive the other to outgoe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he them both outran a wondrous space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he was long, and swift as any Roe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now made better speed t’escape his feared foe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It was not Satyrane, whom he did feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Britomart the flowre of chastity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he the powre of chaste hands might not beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But alwayes did their dread encounter fly:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now so fast his feet he did apply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he has gotten to a forrest neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where he is shrowded in security.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wood they enter, and search everie where;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They searched diversely, so both divided were.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Fayre Britomart so long him followed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she at last came to a fountaine sheare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which there lay a knight all wallowed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the grassy ground, and by him neare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His haberjeon, his helmet, and his speare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A little off his shield was rudely throwne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which the winged boy in colours cleare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Depeincted was, full easie to be knowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he thereby, where ever it in field was showne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His face upon the grownd did groveling ly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if he had beene slombring in the shade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the brave Mayd would not for courtesy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of his quiet slomber him abrade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor seeme too suddeinly him to invade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still as she stood, she heard with grievous throb</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him grone, as if his hart were peeces made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with most painefull pangs to sigh and sob,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That pitty did the Virgins hart of patience rob.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last forth breaking into bitter plaintes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He sayd; “O soverayne Lord! that sit’st on hye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And raignst in blis emongst thy blessed Saintes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How suffrest thou such shamefull cruelty</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So long unwreaked of thine enimy?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or hast thou, Lord, of good mens cause no heed?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or doth thy justice sleepe and silent ly?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What booteth then the good and righteous deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If goodnesse find no grace, nor righteousnes no meed?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“If good find grace, and righteousnes reward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why then is Amoret in caytive band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith that more bounteous creature never far’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On foot upon the face of living land?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or if that hevenly justice may withstand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wrongfull outrage of unrighteous men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why then is Busirane with wicked hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Suffred, these seven monethes day, in secret den</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Lady and my love so cruelly to pen!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“My Lady and my love is cruelly pend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In dolefull darkenes from the vew of day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilest deadly torments doe her chast brest rend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the sharpe steele doth rive her hart in tway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All for she Scudamore will not denay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet thou, vile man, vile Scudamore, art sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne canst her ayde, ne canst her foe dismay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unworthy wretch to tread upon the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For whom so faire a Lady feeles so sore a wound!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There an huge heape of singults did oppresse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His strugling soule, and swelling throbs empeach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His foltring toung with pangs of drerinesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Choking the remnant of his plaintife speach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if his dayes were come to their last reach:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when she heard, and saw the ghastly fit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Threatning into his life to make a breach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both with great ruth and terrour she was smit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fearing least from her cage the wearie soule would flit.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho stouping downe she him amoved light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, therewith somewhat starting, up gan looke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seeing him behind a stranger knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereas no living creature he mistooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With great indignaunce he that sight forsooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, downe againe himselfe disdainfully</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abjecting, th’earth with his faire forhead strooke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which the bold Virgin seeing gan apply</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fit medcine to his griefe, and spake thus courtesly:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ah gentle knight! whose deepe conceived griefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well seemes t’exceede the powre of patience,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, if that hevenly grace some goode reliefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You send, submit you to high providence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever in your noble hart prepense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the sorrow in the world is lesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then vertues might and values confidence:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For who nill bide the burden of distresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must not here thinke to live; for life is wretchednesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Therefore, faire Sir, doe comfort to you take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And freely read what wicked felon so</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath outrag’d you, and thrald your gentle make.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perhaps this hand may helpe to ease your woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wreake your sorrow on your cruell foe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At least it faire endevour will apply.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those feeling words so neare the quicke did goe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That up his head he reared easily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, leaning on his elbowe, these few words lett fly.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“What boots it plaine that cannot be redrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sow vaine sorrow in a fruitlesse eare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith powre of hand, nor skill of learned brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne worldly price, cannot redeeme my deare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of her thraldome and continuall feare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he, the tyrant, which her hath in ward</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By strong enchauntments and blacke Magicke leare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath in a dungeon deepe her close embard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many dreadfull feends hath pointed to her gard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“There he tormenteth her most terribly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And day and night afflicts with mortall paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because to yield him love she doth deny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Once to me yold, not to be yolde againe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yet by torture he would her constraine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Love to conceive in her disdainfull brest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till so she doe, she must in doole remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne may by living meanes be thence relest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What boots it then to plaine that cannot be redrest?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With this sad hersall of his heavy stresse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The warlike Damzell was empassiond sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sayd; “Sir knight, your cause is nothing lesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then is your sorrow certes, if not more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For nothing so much pitty doth implore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As gentle Ladyes helplesse misery:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yet, if please ye listen to my lore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I will, with proofe of last extremity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deliver her fro thence, or with her for you dy.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ah! gentlest knight alive,” (sayd Scudamore)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“What huge heroicke magnanimity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dwells in thy bounteous brest! what couldst thou more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If shee were thine, and thou as now am I?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O! spare thy happy daies, and them apply</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To better boot; but let me die that ought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More is more losse; one is enough to dy.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Life is not lost,” (said she) “for which is bought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endlesse renowm, that, more then death, is to be sought.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus shee at length persuaded him to rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with her wend to see what new successe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mote him befall upon new enterprise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His armes, which he had vowed to disprofesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She gathered up and did about him dresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his forwandred steed unto him gott:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So forth they forth yfere make their progresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And march not past the mountenaunce of a shott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till they arriv’d whereas their purpose they did plott.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There they dismounting drew their weapons bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stoutly came unto the Castle gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereas no gate they found them to withhold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor ward to waite at morne and evening late;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in the Porch, that did them sore amate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A flaming fire, ymixt with smouldry smoke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stinking sulphure, that with griesly hate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dreadfull horror did all entraunce choke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enforced them their forward footing to revoke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Greatly thereat was Britomart dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne in that stownd wist how her selfe to beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For daunger vaine it were to have assayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That cruell element, which all things feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne none can suffer to approchen neare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, turning backe to Scudamour, thus sayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“What monstrous enmity provoke we heare?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Foolhardy as th’Earthes children, the which made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Batteill against the Gods, so we a God invade.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Daunger without discretion to attempt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Inglorious, beastlike is: therefore, Sir knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A read what course of you is safest dempt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And how we with our foe may come to fight.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“This is” (quoth he) “the dolorous despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which earst to you I playnd: for neither may</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This fire be quencht by any witt or might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne yet by any meanes remov’d away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So mighty be th’enchauntments which the same do stay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“What is there ells but cease these fruitlesse paines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And leave me to my former languishing?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Amorett must dwell in wicked chaines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Scudamore here die with sorrowing.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Perdy not so,” (saide shee) “for shameful thing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yt were t’abandon noble chevisaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For shewe of perill, without venturing:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rather let try extremities of chaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then enterprised praise for dread to disavaunce.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith, resolv’d to prove her utmost might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her ample shield she threw before her face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her swords point directing forward right</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Assayld the flame; the which eftesoones gave place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did it selfe divide with equall space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That through she passed, as a thonder bolt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perceth the yielding ayre, and doth displace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The soring clouds into sad showres ymolt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So to her yold the flames, and did their force revolt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom whenas Scudamour saw past the fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Safe and untoucht, he likewise gan assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With greedy will and envious desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bad the stubborne flames to yield him way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But cruell Mulciber would not obay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His threatfull pride, but did the more augment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mighty rage, and with imperious sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him forst, (maulgre) his fercenes to relent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And backe retire, all scorcht and pittifully brent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With huge impatience he inly swelt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More for great sorrow that he could not pas</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then for the burning torment which he felt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with fell woodnes he effierced was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wilfully him throwing on the gras</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did beat and bounse his head and brest ful sore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles the Championesse now entred has</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The utmost rowme, and past the foremost dore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The utmost rowme abounding with all precious store:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For round about the walls yclothed were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With goodly arras of great majesty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Woven with gold and silke, so close and nere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the rich metall lurked privily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As faining to be hidd from envious eye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet here, and there, and every where, unwares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It shewd it selfe and shone unwillingly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like a discolourd Snake, whose hidden snares</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the greene gras his long bright burnisht back declares.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And in those Tapets weren fashioned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Many faire pourtraicts, and many a faire feate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all of love, and al of lusty-hed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As seemed by their semblaunt, did entreat:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke all Cupids warres they did repeate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cruell battailes, which he whilome fought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst all the Gods to make his empire great;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besides the huge massacres, which he wrought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On mighty kings and kesars into thraldome brought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therein was writt how often thondring Jove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had felt the point of his hart-percing dart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, leaving heavens kingdome, here did rove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In straunge disguize, to slake his scalding smart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now, like a Ram, faire Helle to pervart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now, like a Bull, Europa to withdraw:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah! how the fearefull Ladies tender hart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did lively seeme to tremble, when she saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The huge seas under her t’obay her servaunts law.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone after that, into a golden showre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him selfe he chaung’d, faire Danaë to vew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through the roofe of her strong brasen towre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did raine into her lap an hony dew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles her foolish garde, that litle knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of such deceipt, kept th’yron dore fast bard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And watcht that none should enter nor issew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vaine was the watch, and bootlesse all the ward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whenas the God to golden hew him selfe transfard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then was he turnd into a snowy Swan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To win faire Leda to his lovely trade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O wondrous skill! and sweet wit of the man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her in daffadillies sleeping made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From scorching heat her daintie limbes to shade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles the proud Bird, ruffing his fethers wyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And brushing his faire brest, did her invade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She slept; yet twixt her eielids closely spyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How towards her he rusht, and smiled at his pryde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then shewd it how the Thebane Semelee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deceivd of gealous Juno, did require</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see him in his soverayne majestee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Armd with his thunderbolts and lightning fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whens dearely she with death bought her desire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But faire Alcmena better match did make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Joying his love in likenes more entire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Three nights in one, they say, that for her sake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He then did put, her pleasures lenger to partake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Twise was he seene in soaring Eagles shape,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with wide winges to beat the buxome ayre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Once, when he with Asterie did scape;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Againe, when as the Trojane boy so fayre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He snatcht from Ida hill, and with him bare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wondrous delight it was there to behould</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How the rude Shepheards after him did stare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Trembling through feare least down he fallen should,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And often to him calling to take surer hould.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In Satyres shape Antiopa he snatcht;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And like a fire, when he Aegin’ assayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A shepeheard, when Mnemosyne he catcht;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And like a Serpent to the Thracian mayd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whyles thus on earth great Jove these pageaunts playd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The winged boy did thrust into his throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And scoffing thus unto his mother sayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Lo! now the hevens obey to me alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And take me for their Jove, whiles Jove to earth is gone.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And thou, faire Phœbus, in thy colours bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wast there enwoven, and the sad distresse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which that boy thee plonged, for despight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That thou bewray’dst his mothers wantonnesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When she with Mars was meynt in joyfulnesse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forthy he thrild thee with a leaden dart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To love faire Daphne, which thee loved lesse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lesse she thee lov’d then was thy just desart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet was thy love her death, and her death was thy smart.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So lovedst thou the lusty Hyacinct;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So lovedst thou the faire Coronis deare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet both are of thy haplesse hand extinct,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet both in flowres doe live, and love thee beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The one a Paunce, the other a sweet-breare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For griefe whereof, ye mote have lively seene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The God himselfe rending his golden heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And breaking quite his garlond ever greene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With other signes of sorrow and impatient teene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Both for those two, and for his owne deare sonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sonne of Climene, he did repent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, bold to guide the charet of the Sunne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himselfe in thousand peeces fondly rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the world with flashing fire brent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So like, that all the walles did seeme to flame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet cruell Cupid, not herewith content,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forst him eftsoones to follow other game,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And love a Shephards daughter for his dearest Dame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He loved Isse for his dearest Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for her sake her cattell fedd awhile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for her sake a cowheard vile became:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The servant of Admetus, cowheard vile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles that from heaven he suffered exile.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long were to tell each other lovely fitt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now, like a Lyon hunting after spoile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now, like a stag; now, like a faulcon flit:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All which in that faire arras was most lively writ.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Next unto him was Neptune pictured,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his divine resemblance wondrous lyke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His face was rugged, and his hoarie hed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dropped with brackish deaw; his threeforkt Pyke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He stearnly shooke, and therewith fierce did stryke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The raging billowes, that on every syde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They trembling stood, and made a long broad dyke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That his swift charet might have passage wyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which foure great Hippodames did draw in temewise tyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His seahorses did seeme to snort amayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from their nosethrilles blow the brynie streame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That made the sparckling waves to smoke agayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And flame with gold; but the white fomy creame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did shine with silver, and shoot forth his beame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The God himselfe did pensive seeme and sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hong adowne his head as he did dreame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For privy love his brest empierced had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne ought but deare Bisaltis ay could make him glad.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He loved eke Iphimedia deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Æolus faire daughter, Arnè hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For whom he turnd him selfe into a Steare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fedd on fodder to beguile her sight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Also to win Deucalions daughter bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He turnd him selfe into a Dolphin fayre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And like a winged horse he tooke his flight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To snaky-locke Medusa to repayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On whom he got faire Pegasus that flitteth in the ayre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Next Saturne was, (but who would ever weene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sullein Saturne ever weend to love?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet love is sullein, and Saturnlike seene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he did for Erigone it prove)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to a Centaure did him selfe transmove.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So proov’d it eke that gratious God of wine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When for to compasse Philliras hard love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He turnd himselfe into a fruitfull vine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And into her faire bosome made his grapes decline.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Long were to tell the amorous assayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gentle pangues, with which he maked meeke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The mightie Mars, to learne his wanton playes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How oft for Venus, and how often eek</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For many other Nymphes, he sore did shreek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With womanish teares, and with unwarlike smarts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Privily moystening his horrid cheeke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There was he painted full of burning dartes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many wide woundes launched through his inner partes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne did he spare (so cruell was the Elfe)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His owne deare mother, (ah! why should he so?)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne did he spare sometime to pricke himselfe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he might taste the sweet consuming woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he had wrought to many others moe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, to declare the mournfull Tragedyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And spoiles wherewith he all the ground did strow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More eath to number with how many eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High heven beholdes sad lovers nightly theeveryes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Kings, Queenes, Lords, Ladies, knights, and Damsels gent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were heap’d together with the vulgar sort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mingled with the raskall rablement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without respect of person or of port,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To shew Dan Cupids powre and great effort:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And round about a border was entrayld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of broken bowes and arrowes shivered short;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And a long bloody river through them rayld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So lively and so like that living sence it fayld.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And at the upper end of that faire rowme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There was an Altar built of pretious stone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of passing valew and of great renowme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which there stood an Image all alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of massy gold, which with his owne light shone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And winges it had with sondry colours dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More sondry colours then the proud Pavone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beares in his boasted fan, or Iris bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When her discolourd bow she spreds through hevens hight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Blyndfold he was; and in his cruell fist</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A mortall bow and arrowes keene did hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which he shot at randon, when him list,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some headed with sad lead, some with pure gold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Ah man! beware how thou those dartes behold.)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A wounded Dragon under him did ly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose hideous tayle his lefte foot did enfold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with a shaft was shot through either eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That no man forth might draw, ne no man remedye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And underneath his feet was written thus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">
						<em>Unto the Victor of the Gods this bee:</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the people in that ample hous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did to that image bowe their humble knee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oft committed fowle Idolatree.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That wondrous sight faire Britomart amazd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne seeing could her wonder satisfie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But ever more and more upon it gazd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whiles the passing brightnes her fraile sences dazd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho, as she backward cast her busie eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To search each secrete of that goodly sted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over the dore thus written she did spye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><em>Bee bold</em>: she oft and oft it over-red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet could not find what sence it figured:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But what so were therein or writ or ment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She was no whit thereby discouraged</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From prosecuting of her first intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But forward with bold steps into the next roome went.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Much fayrer then the former was that roome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And richlier by many partes arayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For not with arras made in painefull loome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with pure gold it all was overlayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wrought with wilde Antickes, which their follies playd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the rich metall as they living were.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A thousand monstrous formes therein were made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as false love doth oft upon him weare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For love in thousand monstrous formes doth oft appeare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And all about the glistring walles were hong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With warlike spoiles and with victorious prayes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of mightie Conquerours and Captaines strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which were whilome captived in their dayes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To cruell love, and wrought their owne decayes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their swerds and speres were broke, and hauberques rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And their proud girlonds of tryumphant bayes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Troden in dust with fury insolent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To shew the victors might and mercilesse intent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The warlike Mayd, beholding earnestly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The goodly ordinaunce of this rich Place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did greatly wonder; ne could satisfy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her greedy eyes with gazing a long space:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But more she mervaild that no footings trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor wight appeard, but wastefull emptinesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And solemne silence over all that place:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Straunge thing it seem’d, that none was to possesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So rich purveyaunce, ne them keepe with carefulnesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, as she lookt about, she did behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How over that same dore was likewise writ,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><em>Be bolde, be bolde</em>, and every where, <em>Be bold</em>;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That much she muz’d, yet could not construe it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By any ridling skill, or commune wit.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last she spyde at that rowmes upper end</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another yron dore, on which was writ,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><em>Be not too bold</em>; whereto though she did bend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her earnest minde, yet wist not what it might intend.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus she there wayted untill eventyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet living creature none she saw appeare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now sad shadowes gan the world to hyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From mortall vew, and wrap in darkenes dreare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet nould she d’off her weary armes, for feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of secret daunger, ne let sleepe oppresse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her heavy eyes with natures burdein deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But drew her selfe aside in sickernesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her wel-pointed wepons did about her dresse.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-3-12" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The maske of Cupid, and th’enchaunted</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Chamber are displayd;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whence Britomart redeemes faire</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Amoret, through charmes decayd.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Tho, whenas chearelesse Night ycovered had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayre heaven with an universall clowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That every wight dismayd with darkenes sad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In silence and in sleepe themselves did shrowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She heard a shrilling Trompet sound alowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Signe of nigh battaill, or got victory:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nought therewith daunted was her courage prowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But rather stird to cruell enmity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Expecting ever when some foe she might descry.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that an hideous storme of winde arose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With dreadfull thunder and lightning atwixt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And an earthquake, as if it streight would lose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The worlds foundations from his centre fixt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A direfull stench of smoke and sulphure mixt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ensewd, whose noyaunce fild the fearefull sted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the fourth howre of night untill the sixt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet the bold Britonesse was nought ydred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though much emmov’d, but stedfast still persevered.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All suddeinly a stormy whirlwind blew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throughout the house, that clapped every dore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which that yron wicket open flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As it with mighty levers had bene tore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And forth yssewd, as on the readie flore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of some Theatre, a grave personage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in his hand a braunch of laurell bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With comely haveour and count’nance sage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yclad in costly garments fit for tragicke Stage.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Proceeding to the midst he stil did stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if in minde he somewhat had to say;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the vulgare beckning with his hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In signe of silence, as to heare a play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By lively actions he gan bewray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some argument of matter passioned:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which doen, he backe retyred soft away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, passing by, his name discovered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ease, on his robe in golden letters cyphered.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The noble Mayd still standing all this vewd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And merveild at his straunge intendiment.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that a joyous fellowship issewd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Minstrales making goodly meriment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With wanton Bardes, and Rymers impudent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which together song full chearefully</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A lay of loves delight with sweet concent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After whom marcht a jolly company,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In manner of a maske, enranged orderly.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The whiles a most delitious harmony</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In full straunge notes was sweetly heard to sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the rare sweetnesse of the melody</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The feeble sences wholy did confound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the frayle soule in deepe delight nigh drownd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, when it ceast, shrill trompets lowd did bray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That their report did far away rebound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, when they ceast, it gan againe to play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whiles the maskers marched forth in trim aray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The first was Fansy, like a lovely Boy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of rare aspect, and beautie without peare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Matchable ether to that ympe of Troy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom Jove did love and chose his cup to beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that same daintie lad, which was so deare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To great Alcides, that, when as he dyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He wailed womanlike with many a teare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every wood and every valley wyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He filld with Hylas name; the Nymphes eke Hylas cryde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His garment nether was of silke nor say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But paynted plumes in goodly order dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as the sunburnt Indians do aray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their tawney bodies in their proudest plight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As those same plumes so seemd he vaine and light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That by his gate might easily appeare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For still he far’d as dauncing in delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his hand a windy fan did beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in the ydle ayre he mov’d still here and theare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And him beside marcht amorous Desyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who seemd of ryper yeares then th’other Swayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was that other swayne this elders syre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gave him being, commune to them twayne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His garment was disguysed very vayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his embrodered Bonet sat awry:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Twixt both his hands few sparks he close did strayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which still he blew and kindled busily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That soone they life conceiv’d, and forth in flames did fly.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Next after him went Doubt, who was yclad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In a discolour’d cote of straunge disguyse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That at his backe a brode Capuccio had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sleeves dependaunt Albanesè-wyse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He lookt askew with his mistrustfull eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And nycely trode, as thornes lay in his way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that the flore to shrinke he did avyse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on a broken reed he still did stay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His feeble steps, which shrunck when hard thereon he lay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With him went Daunger, cloth’d in ragged weed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made of Beares skin, that him more dreadfull made;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet his owne face was dreadfull, ne did need</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Straunge horrour to deforme his griesly shade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A net in th’one hand, and a rusty blade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In th’other was; this Mischiefe, that Mishap:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With th’one his foes he threatned to invade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With th’other he his friends ment to enwrap;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For whom he could not kill he practizd to entrap.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Next him was Feare, all arm’d from top to toe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet thought himselfe not safe enough thereby,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But feard each shadow moving too or froe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, his owne armes when glittering he did spy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or clashing heard, he fast away did fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As ashes pale of hew, and winged heeld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evermore on Daunger fixt his eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst whom he alwayes bent a brasen shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which his right hand unarmed fearefully did wield.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With him went Hope in rancke, a handsome Mayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of chearefull looke and lovely to behold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In silken samite she was light arayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her fayre lockes were woven up in gold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She alway smyld, and in her hand did hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An holy-water-sprinckle, dipt in deowe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which she sprinckled favours manifold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On whom she list, and did great liking sheowe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great liking unto many, but true love to feowe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And after them Dissemblaunce and Suspect</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Marcht in one rancke, yet an unequall paire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she was gentle and of milde aspect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Courteous to all and seeming debonaire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Goodly adorned and exceeding faire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was that all but paynted and pourloynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her bright browes were deckt with borrowed haire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her deeds were forged, and her words false coynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And alwaies in her hand two clewes of silke she twynd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But he was fowle, ill favoured, and grim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under his eiebrowes looking still askaunce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever, as Dissemblaunce laught on him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He lowrd on her with daungerous eyeglaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shewing his nature in his countenaunce:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His rolling eies did never rest in place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But walkte each where for feare of hid mischaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Holding a lattis still before his face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through which he stil did peep as forward he did pace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Next him went Griefe and Fury, matcht yfere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Griefe all in sable sorrowfully clad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Downe hanging his dull head with heavy chere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet inly being more then seeming sad:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A paire of Pincers in his hand he had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which he pinched people to the hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from thenceforth a wretched life they ladd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In wilfull languor and consuming smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dying each day with inward wounds of dolours dart.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Fury was full ill appareiled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In rags, that naked nigh she did appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With ghastly looks and dreadfull drerihed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from her backe her garments she did teare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from her head ofte rente her snarled heare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In her right hand a firebrand shee did tosse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About her head, still roming here and there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As a dismayed Deare in chace embost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgetfull of his safety, hath his right way lost.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>After them went Displeasure and Pleasaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He looking lompish and full sullein sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hanging downe his heavy countenaunce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She chearfull, fresh, and full of joyaunce glad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if no sorrow she ne felt ne drad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That evill matched paire they seemd to bee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An angry Waspe th’one in a viall had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th’other in hers an hony-laden Bee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus marched these six couples forth in faire degree.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>After all these there marcht a most faire Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Led of two grysie Villeins, th’one Despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other cleped Cruelty by name:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She, dolefull Lady, like a dreary Spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cald by strong charmes out of eternall night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had Deathes owne ymage figurd in her face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of sad signes, fearfull to living sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet in that horror shewd a seemely grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with her feeble feete did move a comely pace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her brest all naked, as nett yvory</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without adorne of gold or silver bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith the Craftesman wonts it beautify,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her dew honour was despoyled quight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And a wide wound therein (O ruefull sight!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Entrenched deep with knyfe accursed keene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet freshly bleeding forth her fainting spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(The worke of cruell hand) was to be seene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That dyde in sanguine red her skin all snowy cleene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At that wide orifice her trembling hart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was drawne forth, and in silver basin layd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quite through transfixed with a deadly dart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in her blood yet steeming fresh embayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And those two villeins, which her steps upstayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When her weake feete could scarcely her sustaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fading vitall powres gan to fade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her forward still with torture did constraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And evermore encreased her consuming paine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Next after her, the winged God him selfe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came riding on a Lion ravenous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Taught to obay the menage of that Elfe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That man and beast with powre imperious</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Subdeweth to his kingdome tyrannous.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His blindfold eies he bad awhile unbinde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That his proud spoile of that same dolorous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Dame he might behold in perfect kinde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which seene, he much rejoyced in his cruell minde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Of which ful prowd, him selfe up rearing hye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He looked round about with sterne disdayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did survay his goodly company;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, marshalling the evill-ordered trayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that the darts which his right hand did straine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full dreadfully he shooke, that all did quake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And clapt on hye his coulourd winges twaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all his many it affraide did make:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tho, blinding him againe, his way he forth did take.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Behinde him was Reproch, Repentaunce, Shame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Reproch the first, Shame next, Repent behinde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kepentaunce feeble, sorrowfull, and lame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Reproch despightfull, carelesse, and unkinde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shame most ill-favourd, bestiall, and blinde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shame lowrd, Repentaunce sighd, Reproch did scould;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Reproch sharpe stings, Repentaunce whips entwinde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shame burning brond-yrons in her hand did hold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All three to each unlike, yet all made in one mould.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And after them a rude confused rout</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of persons flockt, whose names is hard to read:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emongst them was Sterne Strife, and Anger stout;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unquiet Care, and fond Unthriftyhead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lewd Losse of Time, and Sorrow seeming dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Inconstant Chaunge, and false Disloyalty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Consuming Riotise, and guilty Dread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of heavenly vengeaunce; faint Infirmity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vile Poverty; and, lastly, Death with infamy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There were full many moe like maladies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose names and natures I note readen well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So many moe, as there be phantasies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In wavering wemens witt, that none can tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or paines in love, or punishments in hell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which disguized marcht in masking wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About the chamber by the Damozell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then returned, having marched thrise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the inner rowme from whence they first did rise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So soone as they were in, the dore streightway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fast locked, driven with that stormy blast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which first it opened, and bore all away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then the brave Maid, which al this while was plast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In secret shade, and saw both first and last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Issewed forth, and went unto the dore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To enter in, but fownd it locked fast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It vaine she thought with rigorous uprore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For to efforce, when charmes had closed it afore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Where force might not availe, there sleights and art</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She cast to use, both fitt for hard emprize:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forthy from that same rowme not to depart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till morrow next shee did her selfe avize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When that same Maske againe should forth arize.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The morrowe next appeard with joyous cheare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Calling men to their daily exercize:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then she, as morrow fresh, her selfe did reare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of her secret stand that day for to outweare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All that day she outwore in wandering</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gazing on that Chambers ornament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that againe the second evening</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her covered with her sable vestiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith the worlds faire beautie she hath blent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, when the second watch was almost past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That brasen dore flew open, and in went</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bold Britomart, as she had late forecast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nether of ydle showes, nor of false charmes aghast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So soone as she was entred, rownd about</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee cast her eies to see what was become</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all those persons which she saw without:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But lo! they streight were vanisht all and some;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne living wight she saw in all that roome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save that same woefull Lady, both whose hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were bounden fast, that did her ill become,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her small waste girt rownd with yron bands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon a brasen pillour, by the which she stands.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And her before the vile Enchaunter sate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Figuring straunge characters of his art:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With living blood he those characters wrate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dreadfully dropping from her dying hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeming transfixed with a cruell dart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all perforce to make her him to love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah! who can love the worker of her smart?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A thousand charmes he formerly did prove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet thousand charmes could not her stedfast hart remove.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as that virgin knight he saw in place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His wicked bookes in hast he overthrew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not caring his long labours to deface;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, fiercely running to that Lady trew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A murdrous knife out of his pocket drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which he thought, for villeinous despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In her tormented bodie to embrew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the stout Damzell, to him leaping light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His cursed hand withheld, and maistered his might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>From her, to whom his fury first he ment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wicked weapon rashly he did wrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, turning to herselfe, his fell intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unwares it strooke into her snowie chest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That litle drops empurpled her faire brest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Exceeding wroth therewith the virgin grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Albe the wound were nothing deepe imprest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fiercely forth her mortall blade she drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To give him the reward for such vile outrage dew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So mightily she smote him, that to ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He fell halfe dead: next stroke him should have slaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had not the Lady, which by him stood bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dernly unto her called to abstaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From doing him to dy: For else her paine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should be remedilesse; sith none but hee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which wrought it could the same recure againe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith she stayd her hand, loth stayd to bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For life she him envyde, and long’d revenge to see:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And to him said: “Thou wicked man, whose meed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For so huge mischiefe and vile villany</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is death, or if that ought doe death exceed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be sure that nought may save thee from to dy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if that thou this Dame do presently</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Restore unto her health and former state:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This doe, and live, els dye undoubtedly.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He, glad of life, that lookt for death but late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did yield him selfe right willing to prolong his date:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, rising up, gan streight to over-looke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those cursed leaves, his charmes back to reverse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full dreadfull thinges out of that balefull booke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He red, and measur’d many a sad verse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That horrour gan the virgins hart to perse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her faire locks up stared stiffe on end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hearing him those same bloody lynes reherse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, all the while he red, she did extend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her sword high over him, if ought he did offend.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Anon she gan perceive the house to quake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the dores to rattle round about:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet all that did not her dismaied make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor slack her threatfull hand for daungers dout:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But still with stedfast eye and courage stout</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abode, to weet what end would come of all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last that mightie chaine, which round about</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her tender waste was wound, adowne gan fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that great brasen pillour broke in peeces small.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The cruell steele, which thrild her dying hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fell softly forth, as of his owne accord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the wyde wound, which lately did dispart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her bleeding brest, and riven bowels gor’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was closed up, as it had not beene bor’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every part to safety full sownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As she were never hurt, was soone restord.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, when she felt her selfe to be unbownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And perfect hole, prostrate she fell unto the grownd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Before faire Britomart she fell prostrate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saying; “Ah noble knight! what worthy meede</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can wretched Lady, quitt from wofull state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yield you in lieu of this your gracious deed?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your vertue selfe her owne reward shall breed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even immortal prayse and glory wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which I your vassall, by your prowesse freed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall through the world make to be notifyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And goodly well advaunce that goodly well was tryde.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Britomart, uprearing her from grownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said: “Gentle Dame, reward enough I weene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For many labours more then I have found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This, that in safetie now I have you seene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And meane of your deliverance have beene.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Henceforth, faire Lady, comfort to you take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And put away remembrance of late teene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Insted thereof, know that your loving Make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath no lesse griefe endured for your gentle sake.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She much was chear’d to heare him mentiond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom of all living wightes she loved best.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then laid the noble Championesse strong hond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon th’enchaunter which had her distrest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So sore, and with foule outrages opprest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that great chaine, wherewith not long ygoe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He bound that pitteous Lady prisoner, now relest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himselfe she bound, more worthy to be so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And captive with her led to wretchednesse and wo.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Returning back, those goodly rowmes, which erst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She saw so rich and royally arayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now vanisht utterly and cleane subverst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She found, and all their glory quite decayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sight of such a chaunge her much dismayd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence forth descending to that perlous porch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those dreadfull flames she also found delayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And quenched quite like a consumed torch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That erst all entrers wont so cruelly to scorch.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>More easie issew now then entrance late</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She found; for now that fained dreadfull flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which chokt the porch of that enchaunted gate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And passage bard to all that thither came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was vanisht quite, as it were not the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gave her leave at pleasure forth to passe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th’Enchaunter selfe, which all that fraud did frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To have efforst the love of that faire lasse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seeing his worke now wasted, deepe engrieved was.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when the Victoresse arrived there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where late she left the pensife Scudamore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With her own trusty Squire, both full of feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Neither of them she found where she them lore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereat her noble hart was stonisht sore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But most faire Amoret, whose gentle spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now gan to feede on hope, which she before</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Conceived had, to see her own deare knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Being thereof beguyld, was fild with new affright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But he, sad man, when he had long in drede</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Awayted there for Britomarts returne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet saw her not, nor signe of her good speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His expectation to despaire did turne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Misdeeming sure that her those flames did burne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therefore gan advize with her old Squire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who her deare nourslings losse no lesse did mourne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence to depart for further aide t’enquire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where let them wend at will, whilest here I doe respire.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
