<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book I: The Legend of the Knight of the Red Cross, or of Holiness</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-1" epub:type="part z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Legend of the Knight of the Red Cross, or of Holiness</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="book-1-prologue" epub:type="prologue">
				<p>
					<span>Lo! I, the man whose Muse whylome did maske,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As time her taught, in lowly Shephards weeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Am now enforst, a farre unfitter taske,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For trumpets sterne to chaunge mine Oaten reeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sing of Knights and Ladies gentle deeds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose praises having slept in silence long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me, all too meane, the sacred Muse areeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To blazon broade emongst her learned throng:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fierce warres and faithful loves shall moralize my song.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Helpe then, O holy Virgin! chiefe of nyne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy weaker Novice to performe thy will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lay forth out of thine everlasting scryne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The antique rolles, which there lye hidden still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Faerie knights, and fayrest Tanaquill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom that most noble Briton Prince so long</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sought through the world, and suffered so much ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I must rue his undeserved wrong:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, helpe thou my weake wit, and sharpen my dull tong!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And thou, most dreaded impe of highest Jove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Venus sonne, that with thy cruell dart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At that good knight so cunningly didst rove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That glorious fire it kindled in his hart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lay now thy deadly Heben bowe apart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with thy mother mylde come to myne ayde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Come, both; and with you bring triumphant Mart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In loves and gentle jollities arraid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After his murdrous spoyles and bloudie rage allayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And with them eke, O Goddesse heavenly bright!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mirrour of grace and Majestie divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great Ladie of the greatest Isle, whose light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like Phœbus lampe throughout the world doth shine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shed thy faire beames into my feeble eyne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And raise my thoughtes, too humble and too vile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To thinke of that true glorious type of thine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The argument of mine afflicted stile:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which to heare vouchsafe, O dearest dread, awhile!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The Patron of true Holinesse</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Foule Errour doth defeate;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hypocrisie, him to entrappe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Doth to his home entreate.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A gentle knight was pricking on the plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ycladd in mightie armes and silver shielde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein old dints of deepe woundes did remaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cruell markes of many a bloodie fielde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet armes till that time did he never wield.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His angry steede did chide his foming bitt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As much disdayning to the curbe to yield.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full jolly knight he seemd, and faire did sitt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As one for knightly giusts and fierce encounters fitt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And on his brest a bloodie Crosse he bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The deare remembrance of his dying Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For whose sweete sake that glorious badge he wore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dead, as living, ever him ador’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his shield the like was also scor’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For soveraine hope which in his helpe he had.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right faithfull true he was in deede and word;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But of his cheere did seeme too solemne sad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet nothing did he dread, but ever was ydrad.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Upon a great adventure he was bond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That greatest Gloriana to him gave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(That greatest Glorious Queene of Faery lond)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To winne him worshippe, and her grace to have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which of all earthly thinges he most did crave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever as he rode his hart did earne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To prove his puissance in battell brave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his foe, and his new force to learne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his foe, a Dragon horrible and stearne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A lovely Lady rode him faire beside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a lowly Asse more white than snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet she much whiter; but the same did hide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under a vele, that wimpled was full low;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And over all a blacke stole she did throw:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one that inly mournd, so was she sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heavie sate upon her palfry slow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seemed in heart some hidden care she had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by her, in her line, a milkewhite lambe she lad.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So pure and innocent, as that same lambe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She was in life, and every vertuous lore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by descent from Royall lynage came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of ancient Kings and Queenes, that had of yore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their scepters stretcht from East to Westerne shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the world in their subjection held;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that infernall feend with foule uprore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forwasted all their land, and them expeld;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom to avenge she had this Knight from far compeld.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Behind her farre away a Dwarfe did lag,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That lasie seemd, in being ever last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or wearied with bearing of her bag</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of needments at his backe. Thus as they past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The day with cloudes was suddeine overcast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And angry Jove an hideous storme of raine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did poure into his Lemans lap so fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That everie wight to shrowd it did constrain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this faire couple eke to shroud themselves were fain.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Enforst to seeke some covert nigh at hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A shadie grove not farr away they spide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That promist ayde the tempest to withstand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose loftie trees, yclad with sommers pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did spred so broad, that heavens light did hide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not perceable with power of any starr:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all within were pathes and alleies wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With footing worne, and leading inward farr.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faire harbour that them seems; so in they entred ar.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And foorth they passe, with pleasure forward led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Joying to heare the birdes sweete harmony,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, therein shrouded from the tempest dred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seemd in their song to scorne the cruell sky.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much can they praise the trees so straight and hy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sayling Pine; the Cedar proud and tall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The vine-propp Elme; the Poplar never dry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The builder Oake, sole king of forrests all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Alpine good for staves; the Cypresse funerall;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Laurell, mede of mightie Conquerours</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Poets sage; the Firre that weepeth still;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Willow, worne of forlorne Paramours;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Eugh, obedient to the benders will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Birch for shaftes; the Sallow for the mill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Mirrhe sweete-bleeding in the bitter wound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The warlike Beech; the Ash for nothing ill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fruitful Olive; and the Platane round;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The carver Holme; the Maple seeldom inward sound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Led with delight, they thus beguile the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until the blustring storme is overblowne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When, weening to returne whence they did stray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They cannot finde that path, which first was showne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wander too and fro in waies unknowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Furthest from end then, when they neerest weene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That makes them doubt their wits be not their owne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So many pathes, so many turnings seene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That which of them to take in diverse doubt they been.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last resolving forward still to fare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that some end they finde, or in or out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That path they take that beaten seemd most bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And like to lead the labyrinth about;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when by tract they hunted had throughout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At length it brought them to a hollowe cave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amid the thickest woods. The Champion stout</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones dismounted from his courser brave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the Dwarfe awhile his needlesse spere he gave.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Be well aware,” quoth then that Ladie milde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Least suddaine mischiefe ye too rash provoke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The danger hid, the place unknowne and wilde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Breedes dreadful doubts. Oft fire is without smoke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And perill without show: therefore your stroke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir Knight, withhold, till further tryall made.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Ah Ladie,” (sayd he) “shame were to revoke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The forward footing for an hidden shade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vertue gives herself light through darknesse for to wade.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Yea but” (quoth she) “the perill of this place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I better wot than you: though nowe too late</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wish you backe returne with foule disgrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet wisedome warnes, whilest foot is in the gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To stay the steppe, ere forced to retrate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This is the wandring wood, this <em>Errours</em> den,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A monster vile, whom God and man does hate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore I read beware.” “Fly, Fly!” (quoth then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fearefull Dwarfe) “this is no place for living men.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, full of fire and greedy hardiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The youthfull Knight could not for ought be staide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But forth unto the darksom hole he went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And looked in: his glistring armor made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A little glooming light, much like a shade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which he saw the ugly monster plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Halfe like a serpent horribly displaide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But th’other halfe did womans shape retaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most lothsom, filthie, foule, and full of vile disdaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, as she lay upon the durtie ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her huge long taile her den all overspred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was in knots and many boughtes upwound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pointed with mortall sting. Of her there bred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A thousand yong ones, which she dayly fed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sucking upon her poisnous dugs; each one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of sundrie shape, yet all ill-favored:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone as that uncouth light upon them shone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into her mouth they crept, and suddain all were gone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Their dam upstart out of her den affraide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rushed forth, hurling her hideous taile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About her cursed head; whose folds displaid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were stretcht now forth at length without entraile.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She lookt about, and seeing one in mayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Armed to point, sought backe to turne againe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For light she hated as the deadly bale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ay wont in desert darkness to remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where plain none might her see, nor she see any plaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when the valiant Elfe perceiv’d, he lept</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Lyon fierce upon the flying pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his trenchand blade her boldly kept</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From turning backe, and forced her to stay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith enrag’d she loudly gan to bray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And turning fierce her speckled taile advaunst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Threatning her angrie sting, him to dismay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, nought aghast, his mightie hand enhaunst:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stroke down from her head unto her shoulder glaunst.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Much daunted with that dint her fence was dazd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet kindling rage her selfe she gathered round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all attonce her beastly bodie raizd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With doubled forces high above the ground:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, wrapping up her wrethed sterne arownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lept fierce upon his shield, and her huge traine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All suddenly about his body wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hand or foot to stirr he strove in vaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God helpe the man so wrapt in Errours endlesse traine!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His Lady, sad to see his sore constraint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cried out, “Now, now, Sir knight, shew what ye bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Add faith unto your force, and be not faint;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strangle her, els she sure will strangle thee.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That when he heard, in great perplexitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His gall did grate for griefe and high disdaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, knitting all his force, got one hand free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith he grypt her gorge with so great paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That soon to loose her wicked bands did her constraine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith she spewd out of her filthie maw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A floud of poyson horrible and blacke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of great lumps of flesh and gobbets raw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which stunck so vildly, that it forst him slacke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His grasping hold, and from her turne him backe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her vomit full of bookes and papers was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With loathly frogs and toades, which eyes did lacke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And creeping sought way in the weedy gras:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her filthie parbreake all the place defiled has.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when old father Nilus gins to swell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With timely pride above the Aegyptian vale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His fattie waves doe fertile slime outwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And overflow each plaine and lowly dale:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when his later spring gins to avale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Huge heapes of mudd he leaves, wherin there breed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ten thousand kindes of creatures, partly male</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And partly female, of his fruitful seed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such ugly monstrous shapes elswher may no man reed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The same so sore annoyed has the knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, welnigh choked with the deadly stinke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His forces faile, ne can no lenger fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose corage when the feend perceivd to shrinke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She poured forth out of her hellish sinke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her fruitfull cursed spawne of serpents small,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deformed monsters, fowle, and blacke as inke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which swarming all about his legs did crall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And him encombred sore, but could not hurt at all.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As gentle shepheard in sweete eventide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When ruddy Phebus gins to welke in west,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">High on an hill, his flocke to vewen wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Markes which doe byte their hasty supper best;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A cloud of cumbrous gnattes doe him molest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All striving to infixe their feeble stinges,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from their noyance he no where can rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with his clownish hands their tender wings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He trusheth oft, and oft doth mar their murmurings.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus ill bestedd, and fearfull more of shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then of the certeine perill he stood in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Halfe furious unto his foe he came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Resolvd in minde all suddenly to win,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or soone to lose, before he once would lin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stroke at her with more than manly force,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from her body, full of filthie sin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He raft her hatefull heade without remorse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A streame of cole-black blood forth gushed from her corse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her scattred brood, soone as their Parent deare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They saw so rudely falling to the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Groning full deadly, all with troublous feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gathred themselves about her body round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weening their wonted entrance to have found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At her wide mouth: but being there withstood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They flocked all about her bleeding wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sucked up their dying mother’s blood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Making her death their life, and eke her hurt their good</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That detestable sight him much amazde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see th’unkindly Impes, of heaven accurst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Devoure their dam; on whom while so he gazd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having all satisfide their bloudy thurst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their bellies swolne he saw with fulnesse burst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bowels gushing forth: well worthy end</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of such as drunke her life the which them nurst!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now needeth him no lenger labour spend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His foes have slaine themselves, with whom he should contend.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His Lady, seeing all that chaunst from farre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Approcht in hast to greet his victorie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saide, “Faire knight, borne under happie starre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who see your vanquisht foes before you lye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well worthie be you of that Armory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein ye have great glory wonne this day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And proov’d your strength on a strong enimie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your first adventure: many such I pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And henceforth ever wish that like succeed it may!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then mounted he upon his Steede again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with the Lady backward sought to wend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That path he kept which beaten was most plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever would to any byway bend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But still did follow one unto the end;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which at last out of the wood them brought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So forward on his way (with God to frend)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He passed forth, and new adventure sought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long way he traveiled before he heard of ought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At length they chaunst to meet upon the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An aged Sire, in long blacke weedes yclad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His feete all bare, his beard all hoarie gray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by his belt his booke he hanging had:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sober he seemde, and very sagely sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the ground his eyes were lowly bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Simple in shew, and voide of malice bad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the way he prayed as he went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And often knockt his brest, as one that did repent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He faire the knight saluted, looting low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who faire him quited, as that courteous was;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after asked him, if he did know</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of straunge adventures, which abroad did pas?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Ah! my dear sonne,” (quoth he) “how should, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Silly old man, that lives in hidden cell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bidding his beades all day for his trespas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tydings of warre and worldly trouble tell?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With holy father fits not with such thinges to mell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But if of daunger, which hereby doth dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And homebredd evil ye desire to heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of a straunge man I can you tidings tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That wasteth all this countrie, farre and neare.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Of such,” (saide he) “I chiefly doe inquere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shall thee well rewarde to shew the place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which that wicked wight his dayes doth weare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For to all knighthood it is foule disgrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That such a cursed creature lives so long a space.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Far hence” (quoth he) “in wastfull wildernesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His dwelling is, by which no living wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May ever passe, but thorough great distresse.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Now,” (said the Ladie,) “draweth toward night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And well I wote, that of your later fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye all forwearied be; for what so strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, wanting rest, will also want of might?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Sunne, that measures heaven all day long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At night doth baite his steedes the Ocean waves emong.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Then with the Sunne take, Sir, your timely rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with new day new worke at once begin:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untroubled night, they say, gives counsell best.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Right well, Sir knight, ye have advised bin,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quoth then that aged man: “the way to win</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is wisely to advise; now day is spent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore with me ye may take up your In</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For this same night.” The knight was well content;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So with that godly father to his home they went.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A litle lowly Hermitage it was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Downe in a dale, hard by a forests side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far from resort of people that did pas</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In traveill to and froe: a little wyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There was an holy chappell edifyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein the Hermite dewly wont to say</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His holy thinges each morne and eventyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereby a christall streame did gently play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which from a sacred fountaine welled forth alway.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Arrived there, the litle house they fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne looke for entertainement where none was;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rest is their feast, and all things at their will:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The noblest mind the best contentment has.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With faire discourse the evening so they pas;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that olde man of pleasing wordes had store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And well could file his tongue as smooth as glas:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He told of Saintes and Popes, and evermore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He strowd an <em>Ave-Mary</em> after and before.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The drouping night thus creepeth on them fast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the sad humor loading their eyeliddes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As messenger of Morpheus, on them cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sweet slombring deaw, the which to sleep them biddes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto their lodgings then his guestes he riddes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where when all drownd in deadly sleepe he findes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He to his studie goes; and there amiddes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His magick bookes, and artes of sundrie kindes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He seekes out mighty charmes to trouble sleepy minds.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then choosing out few words most horrible,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Let none them read) thereof did verses frame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which, and other spelles like terrible,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He bade awake blacke Plutoes griesly Dame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cursed heven; and spake reprochful shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of highest God, the Lord of life and light:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A bold bad man, that dar’d to call by name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great Gorgon, prince of darknes and dead night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At which Cocytus quakes, and Styx is put to flight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And forth he cald out of deepe darkness dredd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Legions of Sprights, the which, like little flyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fluttring about his ever-damned hedd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Awaite whereto their service he applyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To aide his friendes, or fray his enimies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of those he chose out two, the falsest twoo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fittest for to forge true-seeming lyes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The one of them he gave a message too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The other by him selfe staide, other worke to doo.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He, making speedy way through spersed ayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through the world of waters wide and deepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Morpheus house doth hastily repaire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amid the bowels of the earth full steepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And low, where dawning day doth never peepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His dwelling is; there Tethys his wet bed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth ever wash, and Cynthia still doth steepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In silver deaw his ever-drouping hed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whiles sad Night over him her mantle black doth spred.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whose double gates he findeth locked fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The one faire fram’d of burnisht Yvory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other all with silver overcast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wakeful dogges before them farr doe lye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Watching to banish Care their enimy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who oft is wont to trouble gentle Sleepe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By them the Sprite doth passe in quietly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto Morpheus comes, whom drowned deepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In drowsie fit he findes: of nothing he takes keepe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And more to lulle him in his slumber soft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A trickling streame from high rock tumbling downe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever-drizling raine upon the loft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mixt with a murmuring winde, much like the sowne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of swarming Bees, did cast him in a swowne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No other noyse, nor peoples troublous cryes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As still are wont t’annoy the walled towne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might there be heard; but carelesse Quiet lyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wrapt in eternall silence farre from enimyes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Messenger approaching to him spake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But his waste wordes retournd to him in vaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So sound he slept, that nought mought him awake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then rudely he him thrust, and pusht with paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat he gan to stretch; but he againe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shooke him so hard, that forced him to speake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one then in a dreame, whose dryer braine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is tost with troubled sights and fancies weake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He mumbled soft, but would not all his silence breake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Sprite then gan more boldly him to wake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And threatned unto him the dreaded name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Hecate: whereat he gan to quake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, lifting up his lompish head, with blame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Halfe angrie asked him, for what he came.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Hether” (quoth he,) “me Archimago sent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He that the stubborne Sprites can wisely tame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He bids thee to him send for his intent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fit false dreame, that can delude the sleepers sent.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The God obayde; and, calling forth straight way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A diverse Dreame out of his prison darke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Delivered it to him, and downe did lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His heavie head, devoide of careful carke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose sences all were straight benumbd and starke.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He, backe returning by the Yvorie dore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Remounted up as light as chearefull Larke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on his litle winges the dreame he bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In haste unto his Lord, where he him left afore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who all this while, with charmes and hidden artes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had made a Lady of that other Spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fram’d of liquid ayre her tender partes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So lively and so like in all mens sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That weaker sence it could have ravisht quight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The maker-selfe, for all his wondrous witt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was nigh beguiled with so goodly sight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her all in white he clad, and over it</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cast a black stole, most like to seeme for Una fit.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now, when that ydle dream was to him brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto that Elfin knight he bad him fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where he slept soundly void of evil thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with false shewes abuse his fantasy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In sort as he him schooled privily:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that new creature, borne without her dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of the makers guile, with usage sly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He taught to imitate that Lady trew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose semblance she did carrie under feigned hew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus, well instructed, to their worke they haste;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, comming where the knight in slomber lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The one upon his hardie head him plaste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made him dream of loves and lustfull play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nigh his manly hart did melt away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bathed in wanton blis and wicked joy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then seemed him his Lady by him lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to him playnd, how that false winged boy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her chaste hart had subdewd to learne Dame Pleasures toy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And she her selfe, of beautie soveraigne Queene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayre Venus, seemde unto his bed to bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her, whom he, waking, evermore did weene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bee the chastest flowre that aye did spring</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On earthly braunch; the daughter of a king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now a loose Leman to vile service bound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the Graces seemed all to sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><em epub:type="se:name.music.song" xml:lang="el-Latn">Hymen Iö Hymen!</em> dauncing all around;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whylst freshest Flora her with Yvie girlond crownd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In this great passion of unwonted lust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or wonted feare of doing ought amis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He starteth up, as seeming to mistrust</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some secret ill, or hidden foe of his.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lo! there before his face his Ladie is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under blacke stole hyding her bayted hooke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as halfe blushing offred him to kiss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With gentle blandishment and lovely look,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most like that Virgin true which for her Knight him took.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All cleane dismayd to see so uncouth sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And halfe enraged at her shamelesse guise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He thought have slaine her in his fierce despight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But hastie heat tempring with sufferance wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He stayde his hand; and gan himselfe advise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To prove his sense, and tempt her faigned truth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wringing her hands, in wemens pitteous wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho can she weepe, to stirre up gentle ruth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both for her noble blood, and for her tender youth.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And sayd, “Ah Sir, my liege Lord, and my love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall I accuse the hidden cruell fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mightie causes wrought in heaven above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or the blind God that doth me thus amate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For hoped love to winne me certaine hate?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet thus perforce he bids me do, or die.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Die is my dew; yet rew my wretched state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You, whom my hard avenging destinie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath made judge of my life or death indifferently.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Your owne deare sake forst me at first to leave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My father’s kingdom”⁠—There she stopt with teares;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her swollen hart her speech seemd to bereave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then again begonne; “My weaker yeares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Captiv’d to fortune and frayle worldly feares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fly to your fayth for succour and sure ayde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let me not die in languor and long teares.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Why, Dame,” (quoth he), “what hath ye thus dismayd?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What frayes ye, that were wont to comfort me affrayd?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Love of your selfe,” she saide, “and deare constraint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lets me not sleepe, but waste the wearie night</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In secret anguish and unpittied plaint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles you in carelesse sleepe are drowned quight.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her doubtfull words made that redoubted knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Suspect her truth; yet since no’ untruth he knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her fawning love with foule disdainefull spight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He would not shend; but said, “Deare dame, I rew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That for my sake unknowne such griefe unto you grew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Assure your selfe, it fell not all to ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all so dear as life is to my hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I deeme your love, and hold me to you bound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne let vaine feares procure your needlesse smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where cause is none; but to your rest depart.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not all content, yet seemd she to appease</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her mournefull plaintes, beguiled of her art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fed with words that could not chose but please:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, slyding softly forth, she turnd as to her ease.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Long after lay he musing at her mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much griev’d to thinke that gentle Dame so light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For whose defence he was to shed his blood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last, dull wearines of former fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having yrockt asleepe his irkesome spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That troublous dreame gan freshly tosse his braine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With bowres, and beds, and ladies deare delight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when he saw his labour all was vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With that misformed spright he back returnd againe.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The guilefull great Enchaunter parts</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The Redcross Knight from Truth:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into whose stead faire Falsehood steps</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And workes him woefull ruth.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>By this the Northerne wagoner had set</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His sevenfold teme behind the stedfast starre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was in Ocean waves yet never wet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But firme is fixt, and sendeth light from farre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To al that in the wide deepe wandring arre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chearefull Chaunticlere with his note shrill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had warned once, that Phœbus fiery carre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hast was climbing up the Easterne hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full envious that night so long his roome did fill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When those accursed messengers of hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That feigning dreame, and that faire-forged Spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came to their wicked maister, and gan tel</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their bootelesse paines, and ill succeeding night:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, all in rage to see his skilfull might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deluded so, gan threaten hellish paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sad Proserpines wrath, them to affright;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when he saw his threatning was but vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He cast about, and searcht his baleful bokes againe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones he tooke that miscreated faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that same other Spright, on whom he spred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A seeming body of the subtle aire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like a young Squire, in loves and lusty hed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His wanton daies that ever loosely led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without regard of armes and dreaded fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those twoo he tooke, and in a secrete bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Covered with darkenes and misdeeming night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Them both together laid to joy in vaine delight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Forthwith he runnes with feigned faithfull hast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto his guest, who, after troublous sights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dreames, gan now to take more sound repast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom suddenly he wakes with fearful frights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one aghast with feends or damned sprights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to him cals; “Rise, rise! unhappy Swaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That here wex old in sleepe, whiles wicked wights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have knit themselves in Venus shameful chaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come, see where your false Lady doth her honor staine.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All in amaze he suddenly up start</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sword in hand, and with the old man went;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who soone him brought into a secret part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where that false couple were full closely ment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In wanton lust and lewd embracement:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when he saw, he burnt with gealous fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The eie of reason was with rage yblent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And would have slaine them in his furious ire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But hardly was restreined of that aged sire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Retourning to his bed in torment great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bitter anguish of his guilty sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He could not rest; but did his stout heart eat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wast his inward gall with deepe despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yrkesome of life, and too long lingring night.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last faire Hesperus in highest skie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had spent his lampe, and brought forth dawning light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then up he rose, and clad him hastily:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dwarfe him brought his steed; so both away do fly.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now when the rosy fingred Morning faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weary of aged Tithones saffron bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had spred her purple robe through deawy aire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the high hils Titan discovered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The royall virgin shooke off drousy hed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, rising forth out of her baser bowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lookt for her knight, who far away was fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for her dwarfe, that wont to waite each howre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then gan she wail and weepe to see that woeful stowre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And after him she rode, with so much speede</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As her slowe beast could make; but all in vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For him so far had borne his light-foot steede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pricked with wrath and fiery fierce disdaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That him to follow was but fruitlesse paine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet she her weary limbes would never rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But every hil and dale, each wood and plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did search, sore grieved in her gentle brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He so ungently left her, whom she loved best.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But subtill Archimago, when his guests</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He saw divided into double parts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Una wandring in woods and forrests,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th’end of his drift, he praisd his divelish arts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That had such might over true meaning harts:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet rests not so, but other meanes doth make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How he may worke unto her further smarts;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For her he hated as the hissing snake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in her many troubles did most pleasure take.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He then devisde himselfe how to disguise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For by his mighty science he could take</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As many formes and shapes in seeming wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As ever Proteus to himselfe could make:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometime a fowle, sometime a fish in lake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now like a foxe, now like a dragon fell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of himselfe he ofte for feare would quake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oft would flie away. O! who can tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hidden powre of herbes, and might of Magick spell?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But now seemde best the person to put on</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that good knight, his late beguiled guest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In mighty armes he was yclad anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And silver shield; upon his coward brest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A bloody crosse, and on his craven crest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A bounch of heares discolourd diversly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full jolly knight he seemde, and wel addrest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when he sate uppon his courser free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saint George himselfe ye would have deemed him to be.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But he, the knight whose semblaunt he did beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The true Saint George, was wandred far away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still flying from his thoughts and gealous feare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will was his guide, and griefe led him astray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last him chaunst to meete upon the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A faithlesse Sarazin, all armde to point,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In whose great shield was writ with letters gay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><em xml:lang="fr">Sans foy</em>; full large of limbe and every joint</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was, and cared not for God or man a point.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hee had a faire companion of his way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A goodly Lady clad in scarlot red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Purfled with gold and pearle of rich assay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And like a Persian mitre on her hed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee wore, with crowns and owches garnished,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which her lavish lovers to her gave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her wanton palfrey all was overspred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With tinsell trappings, woven like a wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose bridle rung with golden bels and bosses brave.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With faire disport, and courting dalliaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She intertainde her lover all the way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when she saw the knight his speare advaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She soon left of her mirth and wanton play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bad her knight addresse him to the fray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His foe was nigh at hand. He, prickte with pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hope to winne his Ladies hearte that day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth spurred fast: adowne his coursers side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The red bloud trickling staind the way, as he did ride.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The knight of the Red Crosse, when him he spide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spurring so hote with rage dispiteous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan fairly couch his speare, and towards ride.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone meete they both, both fell and furious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, daunted with theyr forces hideous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their steeds doe stagger, and amazed stand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke themselves, too rudely rigorous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Astonied with the stroke of their owne hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doe backe rebutte, and ech to other yealdeth land.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when two rams, stird with ambitious pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fight for the rule of the rich fleeced flocke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their horned fronts so fierce on either side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe meete, that, with the terror of the shocke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Astonied, both stand sencelesse as a blocke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forgetfull of the hanging victory:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So stood these twaine, unmoved as a rocke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both staring fierce, and holding idely</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The broken reliques of their former cruelty.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Sarazin, sore daunted with the buffe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Snatcheth his sword, and fiercely to him flies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who well it wards, and quyteth cuff with cuff:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each others equall puissance envies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through their iron sides with cruell spies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Does seeke to perce; repining courage yields</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No foote to foe: the flashing fier flies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As from a forge, out of their burning shields;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And streams of purple blood new die the verdant fields.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Curse on that Crosse,” (quoth then the Sarazin,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“That keepes thy body from the bitter fitt!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dead long ygoe, I wote, thou haddest bin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had not thy charme from thee forwarned itt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yet I warne thee now assured sitt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hide thy head.” Therewith upon his crest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With rigor so outrageous he smitt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That a large share it hewd out of the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And glauncing downe his shield from blame him fairly blest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who, thereat wondrous wroth, the sleeping spark</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of native vertue gan eftsoones revive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at his haughty helmet making mark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So hugely stroke, that it the steele did rive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cleft his head. He, tumbling downe alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With bloudy mouth his mother earth did kis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Greeting his grave: his grudging ghost did strive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the fraile flesh; at last it flitted is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether the soules doe fly of men that live amis.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Lady, when she saw her champion fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like the old ruines of a broken towre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Staid not to waile his woefull funerall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But from him fled away with all her powre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who after her as hastily gan scowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bidding the dwarfe with him to bring away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Sarazins shield, signe of his conqueroure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her soone he overtooke, and bad to stay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For present cause was none of dread her to dismay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She turning backe, with ruefull countenaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cride, “Mercy, mercy, Sir, vouchsafe to show</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On silly Dame, subject to hard mischaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to your mighty wil!” Her humblesse low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In so ritch weedes, and seeming glorious show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did much emmove his stout heroïcke heart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said, “Deare dame, your suddein overthrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much rueth me; but now put feare apart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tel both who ye be, and who that tooke your part.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Melting in teares, then gan she thus lament.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“The wretched woman, whom unhappy howre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath now made thrall to your commandement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before that angry heavens lift to lowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fortune false betraide me to thy powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was (O! what now availeth that I was?)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Borne the sole daughter of an Emperour;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He that the wide West under his rule has,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And high hath set his throne where Tiberis doth pas.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“He, in the first flowre of my freshest age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Betrothed me unto the onely haire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of a most mighty king, most rich and sage:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was never Prince so faithfull and so faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was never Prince so meeke and debonaire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But ere my hoped day of spousall shone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My dearest Lord fell from high honors staire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the hands of his accursed fone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cruelly was slaine; that shall I ever mone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“His blessed body, spoild of lively breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was afterward, I know not how, convaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fro me hid: of whose most innocent death</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When tidings came to mee, unhappy maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O, how great sorrow my sad soule assaid!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then forth I went his woefull course to find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many yeares throughout the world I straid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A virgin widow; whose deepe wounded mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With love long time did languish, as the striken hind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“At last it chaunced this proud Sarazin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To meete me wandring; who perforce me led</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With him away, but yet could never win</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Fort, that Ladies hold in soveraigne dread.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There lies he now with foule dishonor dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, whiles he livde, was called proud <span xml:lang="fr">Sans foy</span>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The eldest of three brethren; all three bred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of one bad sire, whose youngest is <span xml:lang="fr">Sans joy</span>;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And twixt them both was born the bloody bold <span xml:lang="fr">Sans loy</span>.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“In this sad plight, friendlesse, unfortunate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now miserable I, Fidessa, dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Craving of you, in pity of my state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To doe none ill, if please ye not doe well.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He in great passion al this while did dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More busying his quicke eies her face to view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then his dull eares to heare what shee did tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said, “faire lady, hart of flint would rew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The undeserved woes and sorrowes, which me shew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Henceforth in safe assuraunce may ye rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having both found a new friend to your aid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lost an old foe that did you molest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Better new friend than an old foe is said.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With chaunge of chear the seeming simple maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let fal her eien, as shamefast, to the earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yeelding soft, in that she nought gainsaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So forth they rode, he feining seemely merth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shee coy lookes: so dainty, they say, maketh derth.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Long time they thus together traveiled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Til, weary of their way, they came at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where grew two goodly trees, that faire did spred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their armes abroad, with gray mosse overcast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And their greene leaves, trembling with every blast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made a calme shadowe far in compasse round:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fearefull shepheard, often there aghast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under them never sat, ne wont there sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His mery oaten pipe, but shund th’unlucky ground.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But this good knight, soone as he them can spie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the coole shade him thither hastly got:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For golden Phœbus, now ymounted hie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From fiery wheeles of his faire chariot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hurled his beame so scorching cruell hot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That living creature mote it not abide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his new Lady it endured not.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There they alight, in hope themselves to hide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the fierce heat, and rest their weary limbs a tide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Faire seemely pleasaunce each to other makes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With goodly purposes, there as they sit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his falsed fancy he her takes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be the fairest wight that lived yit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to expresse he bends his gentle wit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, thinking of those braunches greene to frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A girlond for her dainty forehead fit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He pluckt a bough; out of whose rifte there came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Small drops of gory blood, that trickled down the same.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith a piteous yelling voice was heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Crying, “O! spare with guilty hands to teare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My tender sides in this rough rynd embard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But fly, ah! fly far hence away, for feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least to you hap that happened to me heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to this wretched Lady, my deare love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O, too deare love, love bought with death too deare!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Astond he stood, and up his heare did hove;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with that suddein horror could no member move.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last whenas the dreadfull passion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was overpast, and manhood well awake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet musing at the straunge occasion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doubting much his fence, he thus bespake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“What voice of damned Ghost from Limbo lake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or guilefull spright wandring in empty aire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both which fraile men doe oftentimes mistake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sends to my doubtful eares these speaches rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ruefull plaints, me bidding guiltlesse blood to spare?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then groning deep; “Nor damned Ghost,” (quoth he,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Nor guileful sprite to thee these words doth speake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But once a man, Fradubio, now a tree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wretched man, wretched tree! whose nature weake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A cruell witch, her cursed will to wreake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath thus transformed, and plast in open plaines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where Boreas doth blow full bitter bleake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And scorching Sunne does dry my secret vaines;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For though a tree I seme, yet cold and heat me paines.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Say on Fradubio, then, or man or tree,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quoth then the Knight; “by whose mischievous arts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Art thou misshaped thus, as now I see?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He oft finds med’cine who his griefe imparts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But double griefs afflict concealing harts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As raging flames who striveth to suppresse.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“The author then,” (said he) “of all my smarts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is one Duessa, a false sorceresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That many errant knights hath broght to wretchednesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“In prime of youthly yeares, when corage hott</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fire of love, and joy of chevalree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First kindled in my breast, it was my lott</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To love this gentle Lady, whome ye see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now not a Lady, but a teeming tree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With whome, as once I rode accompanyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me chaunced of a knight encountred be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That had a like faire Lady by his syde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a faire Lady, but did fowle Duessa hyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Whose forged beauty he did take in hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All other Dames to have exceeded farre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I in defence of mine did likewise stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mine, that did then shine as the Morning starre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So both to batteill fierce arraunged arre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which his harder fortune was to fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under my speare: such is the dye of warre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His Lady, left as a prise martiall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did yield her comely person to be at my call.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“So doubly lov’d of ladies, unlike faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th’one seeming such, the other such indeede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One day in doubt I cast for to compare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether in beauties glorie did exceede:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Rosy girlond was the victors meede.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both seemde to win, and both seemde won to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So hard the discord was to be agreede.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Frælissa was as faire as faire mote bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ever false Duessa seemde as faire as shee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The wicked witch, now seeing all this while</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The doubtfull ballaunce equally to sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What not by right she cast to win by guile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by her hellish science raisd streight way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A foggy mist, that overcast the day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And a dull blast, that breathing on her face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dimmed her former beauties shining ray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with foule ugly forme did her disgrace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then was she fayre alone, when none was faire in place.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Then cride she out, ‘Fye, fye! deformed wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose borrowed beautie now appeareth plaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To have before bewitched all mens sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O! leave her soone, or let her soone be slaine.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her loathly visage viewing with disdaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones I thought her such as she me told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And would have killed her; but with faigned paine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The false witch did my wrathfull hand withhold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So left her, where she now is turnd to treen mould.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thensforth I tooke Duessa for my Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the witch unweeting joyd long time;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever wist but that she was the same;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till on a day (that day is everie Prime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When Witches wont do penance for their crime,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I chaunst to see her in her proper hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bathing her selfe in origane and thyme:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A filthy foule old woman I did vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ever to have toucht her I did deadly rew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Her neather partes misshapen, monstruous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were hidd in water, that I could not see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But they did seeme more foule and hideous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then womans shape man would believe to bee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thensforth from her most beastly companie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I gan refraine, in minde to slipp away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone as appeard safe opportunitie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For danger great, if not assurd decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw before mine eyes, if I were knowne to stray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The divelish hag by chaunges of my cheare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perceiv’d my thought; and, drownd in sleepie night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With wicked herbes and oyntments did besmeare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My body all, through charmes and magicke might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all my senses were bereaved quight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then brought she me into this desert waste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by my wretched lovers side me pight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where now, enclosd in wooden wals full faste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Banisht from living wights, our wearie daies we waste.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But how long time,” said then the Elfin knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Are you in this misformed house to dwell?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“We may not chaunge,” (quoth he,) “this evil plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till we be bathed in a living well:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is the terme prescribed by the spell.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“O! how,” sayd he, “mote I that well out find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That may restore you to your wonted well?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Time and suffised fates to former kynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall us restore; none else from hence may us unbynd.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The false Duessa, now Fidessa hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Heard how in vaine Fradubio did lament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And knew well all was true. But the good knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of sad feare and ghastly dreriment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When all this speech the living tree had spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bleeding bough did thrust into the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from the blood he might be innocent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with fresh clay did close the wooden wound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, turning to his Lady, dead with feare her fownd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her seeming dead he found with feigned feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As all unweeting of that well she knew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And paynd himselfe with busie care to reare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her out of carelesse swowne. Her eyelids blew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dimmed sight, with pale and deadly hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last she up gan lift: with trembling cheare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her up he tooke, (too simple and too trew)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oft her kist. At length, all passed feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He set her on her steede, and forward forth did beare.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-3" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Forsaken Truth long seeks her love,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And makes the Lyon mylde;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Marres blide Devotions mart, and fals</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In hand of leachour vylde.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Nought is there under heav’ns wide hollownesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That moves more deare compassion of mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then beautie brought t’unworthie wretchednesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through envies snares, or fortunes freakes unkind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I, whether lately through her brightnes blynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or through alleageance, and fast fealty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which I do owe unto all womankynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Feele my hart perst with so great agony,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When such I see, that all for pitty I could dy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now it is empassioned so deepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For fairest Unaes sake, of whom I sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That my frayle eies these lines with teares do steepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To thinke how she through guyleful handeling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though true as touch, though daughter of a king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though faire as ever living wight was fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though nor in word nor deede ill meriting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is from her knight divorced in despayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her dew loves deryv’d to that vile witches shayre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet she, most faithfull Ladie, all this while</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forsaken, wofull, solitarie mayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far from all peoples preace, as in exile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In wildernesse and wastfull deserts strayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke her knight; who, subtily betrayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through that late vision which th’Enchaunter wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had her abandond. She, of nought affrayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through woods and wastnes wide him daily sought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet wished tydinges none of him unto her brought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One day, nigh wearie of the yrkesome way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From her unhastie beast she did alight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on the grasse her dainty limbs did lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In secrete shadow, far from all mens sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From her fayre head her fillet she undight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And layd her stole aside. Her angels face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As the great eye of heaven, shyned bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made a sunshine in the shady place:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did never mortall eye behold such heavenly grace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It fortuned, out of the thickest wood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A ramping Lyon rushed suddeinly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hunting full greedy after salvage blood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone as the royall virgin he did spy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With gaping mouth at her ran greedily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To have attonce devourd her tender corse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to the pray when as he drew more ny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His bloody rage aswaged with remorse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, with the sight amazd, forgat his furious forse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In stead thereof he kist her wearie feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lickt her lilly hands with fawning tong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he her wronged innocence did weet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O, how can beautie maister the most strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And simple truth subdue avenging wrong!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose yielded pryde and proud submission,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still dreading death, when she had marked long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her hart gan melt in great compassion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drizling teares did shed for pure affection.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The Lyon, Lord of everie beast in field,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quoth she, “his princely puissance doth abate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mightie proud to humble weake does yield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forgetfull of the hungry rage, which late</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him prickt, in pittie of my sad estate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he, my Lyon, and my noble Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How does he find in cruell hart to hate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her, that him lov’d, and ever most adord</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the God of my life? why hath he me abhord?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Redounding teares did choke th’end of her plaint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which softly ecchoed from the neighbour wood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, sad to see her sorrowfull constraint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The kingly beast upon her gazing stood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With pittie calmd downe fell his angry mood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last, in close hart shutting up her payne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arose the virgin, borne of heavenly brood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to her snowy Palfrey got agayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To seeke her strayed Champion if she might attayne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Lyon would not leave her desolate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with her went along, as a strong gard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her chast person, and a faythfull mate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her sad troubles and misfortunes hard:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still, when she slept, he kept both watch and ward;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, when she wakt, he wayted diligent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With humble service to her will prepard:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From her fayre eyes he tooke commandement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ever by her lookes conceived her intent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Long she thus traveiled through deserts wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which she thought her wandring knight shold pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet never shew of living wight espyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that at length she found the troden gras,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which the tract of peoples footing was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under the steepe foot of a mountaine hore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The same she followes, till at last she has</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A damzel spyde, slow footing her before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That on her shoulders sad a pot of water bore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom approching she to her gan call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet, if dwelling place were nigh at hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the rude wench her answer’d nought at all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She could not heare, nor speake, nor understand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till, seeing by her side the Lyon stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With suddeine feare her pitcher downe she threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fled away: for never in that land</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Face of fayre Ladie she before did vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that dredd Lyons looke her cast in deadly hew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Full fast she fled, ne ever lookt behynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if her life upon the wager lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And home she came, whereas her mother blynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sate in eternall night: nought could she say;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, suddeine catching hold, did her dismay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With quaking hands, and other signes of feare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, full of ghastly fright and cold affray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan shut the dore. By this arrived there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dame Una, weary Dame, and entrance did requere.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when none yielded, her unruly Page</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his rude clawes the wicket open rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And let her in; where, of his cruell rage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nigh dead with feare, and faint astonishment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee found them both in darksome corner pent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where that old woman day and night did pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon her beads, devoutly penitent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nine hundred <em xml:lang="la">Pater nosters</em> every day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thrise nine hundred <em>Aves</em> she was wont to say.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And to augment her painefull penaunce more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrise every weeke in ashes shee did sitt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And next her wrinkled skin rough sackecloth wore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thrise three times did fast from any bitt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But now, for feare her beads she did forgett:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose needlesse dread for to remove away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Una framed words and count’naunce fitt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which hardly doen, at length she gan them pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in their cotage small that night she rest her may.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The day is spent; and commeth drowsie night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When every creature shrowded is in sleepe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sad Una downe her laies in weary plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at her feete the Lyon watch doth keepe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In stead of rest she does lament and weepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the late losse of her deare loved knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sighes, and grones, and evermore does steepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her tender brest in bitter teares all night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All night she thinks too long, and often lookes for light.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now when Aldeboran was mounted hye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above the shinie Cassiopeias chaire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all in deadly sleepe did drowned lye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One knocked at the dore, and in would fare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He knocked fast, and often curst, and sware,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ready entraunce was not at his call;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For on his backe a heavy load he bare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of nightly stelths, and pillage severall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which he had got abroad by purchas criminall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He was, to weete, a stout and sturdy thiefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wont to robbe churches of their ornaments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And poore mens boxes of their due reliefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which given was to them for good intents:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The holy Saints of their rich vestiments</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He did disrobe, when all men carelesse slept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And spoild the Priests of their habiliments;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles none the holy things in safety kept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he by conning sleights in at the window crept.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And all that he by right or wrong could find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto this house he brought, and did bestow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the daughter of this woman blind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abessa, daughter of Corceca slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With whom he whoredome usd, that few did know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fed her fatt with feast of offerings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And plenty, which in all the land did grow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne spared he to give her gold and rings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now he to her brought part of his stolen things.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus, long the dore with rage and threats he bett,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet of those fearfull women none durst rize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Lyon frayed them, him in to lett.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He would no lenger stay him to advize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But open breakes the dore in furious wize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And entring is, when that disdainfull beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Encountring fierce, him suddein doth surprize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, seizing cruell clawes on trembling brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under his Lordly foot him proudly hath supprest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Him booteth not resist, nor succour call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His bleeding hart is in the vengers hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who streight him rent in thousand peeces small,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And quite dismembred hath: the thirsty land</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dronke up his life; his corse left on the strand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His fearefull freends weare out the wofull night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne dare to weepe, nor seeme to understand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The heavie hap which on them is alight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Affraid least to themselves the like mishappen might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now when broad day the world discovered has,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Up Una rose, up rose the lyon eke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on their former journey forward pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In waies unknowne, her wandring knight to seeke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With paines far passing that long wandring Greeke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That for his love refused deitye.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such were the labours of this Lady meeke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still seeking him, that from her still did flye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then furthest from her hope, when most she weened nye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as she parted thence, the fearfull twayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That blind old woman, and her daughter deare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came forth; and, finding Kirkrapine there slayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For anguish great they gan to rend their heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And beat their brests, and naked flesh to teare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when they both had wept and wayld their fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then forth they ran, like two amazed deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Halfe mad through malice and revenging will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To follow her that was the causer of their ill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whome overtaking, they gan loudly bray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hollow houling, and lamenting cry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shamefully at her rayling all the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her accusing of dishonesty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was the flowre of faith and chastity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And still, amidst her rayling, she did pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That plagues, and mischiefes, and long misery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might fall on her, and follow all the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that in endlesse error she might ever stray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, when she saw her prayers nought prevaile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee backe retourned with some labour lost;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the way, as shee did weepe and waile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A knight her met in mighty armes embost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet knight was not for all his bragging bost;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But subtill Archimag, that Una sought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By traynes into new troubles to have toste:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that old woman tidings he besought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If that of such a Lady shee could tellen ought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith she gan her passion to renew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cry, and curse, and raile, and rend her heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saying, that harlott she too lately knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That causd her shed so many a bitter teare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so forth told the story of her feare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much seemed he to mone her haplesse chaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after for that Lady did inquere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which being taught, he forward gan advaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His fair enchaunted steed, and eke his charmed launce.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ere long he came where Una traveild slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that wilde champion wayting her besyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whome seeing such, for dread hee durst not show</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him selfe too nigh at hand, but turned wyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto an hil; from whence when she him spyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By his like seeming shield her knight by name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She weend it was, and towards him gan ride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Approaching nigh she wist it was the same;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with faire fearefull humblesse towards him shee came:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And weeping said, “Ah, my long lacked Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where have ye bene thus long out of my sight?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much feared I to have bene quite abhord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ought have done, that ye displeasen might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That should as death unto my deare heart light:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For since mine eye your joyous sight did mis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My chearefull day is turnd to chearelesse night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke my night of death the shadow is;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But welcome now, my light, and shining lampe of blis!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He thereto meeting said, “My dearest Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far be it from your thought, and fro my wil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To thinke that knighthood I so much should shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As you to leave that have me loved stil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chose in Faery court, of meere goodwil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where noblest knights were to be found on earth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The earth shall sooner leave her kindly skil</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bring forth fruit, and make eternal derth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then I leave you, my liefe, yborn of hevenly berth.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And sooth to say, why I lefte you so long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was for to seeke adventure in straunge place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where, Archimago said, a felon strong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To many knights did daily worke disgrace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But knight he now shall never more deface:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Good cause of mine excuse, that mote ye please</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well to accept, and evermore embrace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My faithfull service, that by land and seas</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have vowd you to defend. Now then, your plaint appease.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His lovely words her seemd due recompence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all her passed paines: one loving howre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For many yeares of sorrow can dispence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A dram of sweete is worth a pound of sowre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee has forgott how many a woeful stowre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For him she late endurd; she speakes no more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of past: true is, that true love hath no powre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To looken backe; his eies be fixt before.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before her stands her knight, for whom she toyld so sore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Much like, as when the beaten marinere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That long hath wandred in the Ocean wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ofte soust in swelling Tethys saltish teare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And long time having tand his tawney hide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With blustring breath of Heaven, that none can bide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And scorching flames of fierce Orions hound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone as the port from far he has espide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His chearfull whistle merily doth sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Nereus crownes with cups; his mates him pledg around.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such joy made Una, when her knight she found;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke th’enchaunter joyous seemde no lesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then the glad marchant, that does vew from ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His ship far come from watrie wildernesse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He hurles out vowes, and Neptune oft doth blesse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So forth they past; and all the way they spent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Discoursing of her dreadful late distresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which he askt her, what the Lyon ment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who told her all that fell, in journey as she went.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They had not ridden far, when they might see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One pricking towards them with hastie heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full strongly armd, and on a courser free</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That through his fiersnesse fomed all with sweat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the sharpe yron did for anger eat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When his hot ryder spurd his chauffed side:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His looke was sterne, and seemed still to threat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cruell revenge, which he in hart did hyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on his shield <em xml:lang="fr">Sansloy</em> in bloody lines was dyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When nigh he drew unto this gentle payre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saw the Red crosse which the knight did beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He burnt in fire; and gan eftsoones prepare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himselfe to batteill with his couched speare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Loth was that other, and did faint through feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To taste th’untryed dint of deadly steele:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yet his Lady did so well him cheare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hope of new good hap he gan to feele;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So bent his speare, and spurd his horse with yron heele.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But that proud Paynim forward came so ferce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And full of wrath, that, with his sharphead speare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through vainly crossed shield he quite did perce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, had his staggering steed not shronke for feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through shield and body eke he should him beare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, so great was the puissance of his push,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from his sadle quite he did him beare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He, tombling rudely downe, to ground did rush,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from his gored wound a well of bloud did gush.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Dismounting lightly from his loftie steed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He to him lept, in minde to reave his life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And proudly said; “Lo! there the worthie meed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of him that slew <span xml:lang="fr">Sansfoy</span> with bloody knife:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Henceforth his ghost, freed from repining strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In peace may passen over Lethe lake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When mourning altars, purgd with enimies life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The black infernall Furies doen aslake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Life from <span xml:lang="fr">Sansfoy</span> thou tookst, <span xml:lang="fr">Sansloy</span> shall from thee take.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith in haste his helmet gan unlace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till Una cride, “O! hold that heavie hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deare Sir, what ever that thou be in place:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enough is, that thy foe doth vanquisht stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now at thy mercy: Mercy not withstand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he is one the truest knight alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though conquered now he lye on lowly land;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, whilest him fortune favourd, fayre did thrive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In bloudy field; therefore, of life him not deprive.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her piteous wordes might not abate his rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, rudely rending up his helmet, would</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have slayne him streight; but when he sees his age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hoarie head of Archimago old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His hasty hand he doth amased hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And halfe ashamed wondred at the sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the old man well knew he, though untold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In charmes and magick to have wondrous might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne ever wont in field, ne in round lists, to fight:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And said, “Why Archimago, lucklesse syre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What doe I see? what hard mishap is this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hath thee hether brought to taste mine yre?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or thine the fault, or mine the error is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In stead of foe to wound my friend amis?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He answered nought, but in a traunce still lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on those guilefull dazed eyes of his</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cloude of death did sit. Which doen away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He left him lying so, ne would no lenger stay:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But to the virgin comes; who all this while</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amased stands, her selfe so mockt to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By him, who has the guerdon of his guile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For so misfeigning her true knight to bee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet is she now in more perplexitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Left in the hand of that same Paynim bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whom her booteth not at all to flie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, by her cleanly garment catching hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her from her Palfrey pluckt, her visage to behold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But her fiers servant, full of kingly aw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And high disdaine, whenas his soveraine Dame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So rudely handled by her foe he saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With gaping jawes full greedy at him came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, ramping on his shield, did weene the same</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have reft away with his sharp rending clawes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he was stout, and lust did now inflame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His corage more, that from his griping pawes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He hath his shield redeemd, and forth his swerd he drawes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O! then, too weake and feeble was the forse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of salvage beast his puissance to withstand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he was strong, and of so mightie corse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As ever wielded speare in warlike hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And feates of armes did wisely understand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eft soones he perced through his chaufed chest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With thrilling point of deadly yron brand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And launcht his Lordly hart: with death opprest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He ror’d aloud, whiles life forsooke his stubborne brest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who now is left to keepe the forlorne maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From raging spoile of lawlesse victors will?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her faithfull gard remov’d, her hope dismaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her selfe a yielded pray to save or spill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He now, Lord of the field, his pride to fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With foule reproches and disdaineful spight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her vildly entertaines; and, will or nill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beares her away upon his courser light:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her prayers nought prevaile, his rage is more of might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And all the way, with great lamenting paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And piteous plaintes, she filleth his dull eares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That stony hart could riven have in twaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the way she wetts with flowing teares;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he, enrag’d with rancor, nothing heares.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her servile beast yet would not leave her so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But followes her far off, ne ought he feares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be partaker of her wandring woe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More mild in beastly kind then that her beastly foe.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-4" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>To sinfull house of Pryde Duessa</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Guydes the faithfull knight;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where, brothers death to wreak, <span xml:lang="fr">Sansjoy</span></span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Doth challenge him to fight.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Young knight whatever, that dost armes professe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through long labours huntest after fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beware of fraud, beware of ficklenesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In choice, and chaunge of thy deare-loved Dame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least thou of her believe too lightly blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rash misweening doe thy hart remove:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For unto knight there is no greater shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then lightnesse and inconstancie in love:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That doth this Redcrosse knights ensample plainly prove.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who, after that he had faire Una lorne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through light misdeeming of her loialtie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And false Duessa in her sted had borne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Called Fidess’, and so supposd to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long with her traveild; till at last they see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A goodly building bravely garnished;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The house of mightie Prince it seemd to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And towards it a broad high way that led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All bare through peoples feet which thether traveiled.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Great troupes of people traveild thetherward</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both day and night, of each degree and place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But few returned, having scaped hard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With balefull beggery, or foule disgrace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which ever after in most wretched case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like loathsome lazars, by the hedges lay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thether Duessa badd him bend his pace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she is wearie of the toilsom way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And also nigh consumed is the lingring day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A stately Pallace built of squared bricke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which cunningly was without morter laid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose wals were high, but nothing strong nor thick,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And golden foile all over them displaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That purest skye with brightnesse they dismaid:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">High lifted up were many loftie towres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And goodly galleries far over laid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of faire windowes and delightful bowres:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the top a Diall told the timely howres.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It was a goodly heape for to behould,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And spake the praises of the workmans witt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But full great pittie, that so faire a mould</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did on so weake foundation ever sitt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For on a sandie hill, that still did flitt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fall away, it mounted was full hie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That every breath of heaven shaked itt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the hinder partes, that few could spie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were ruinous and old, but painted cunningly.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Arrived there, they passed in forth right;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For still to all the gates stood open wide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet charge of them was to a Porter hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cald Malvenú, who entrance none denide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence to the hall, which was on every side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With rich array and costly arras dight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Infinite sortes of people did abide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There waiting long, to win the wished sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of her, that was the Lady of that Pallace bright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By them they passe, all gazing on them round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the Presence mount; whose glorious vew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their frayle amazed senses did confound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In living Princes court none ever knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such endlesse richesse, and so sumpteous shew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne Persia selfe, the nourse of pompous pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like ever saw. And there a noble crew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Lords and Ladies stood on every side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which with their presence fayre the place much beautifide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>High above all a cloth of State was spred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And a rich throne, as bright as sunny day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which there sate, most brave embellished</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With royall robes and gorgeous array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A mayden Queene that shone as Titans ray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In glistring gold and perelesse pretious stone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet her bright blazing beautie did assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To dim the brightnesse of her glorious throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As envying her selfe, that too exceeding shone:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Exceeding shone, like Phœbus fayrest childe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That did presume his fathers fyrie wayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And flaming mouthes of steedes, unwonted wilde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through highest heaven with weaker hand to rayne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proud of such glory and advancement vayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While flashing beames do daze his feeble eyen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He leaves the welkin way most beaten playne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, rapt with whirling wheeles, inflames the skyen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With fire not made to burne, but fayrely for to shyne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So proud she shyned in her Princely state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Looking to heaven, for earth she did disdayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sitting high, for lowly she did hate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lo underneath her scornefull feete was layne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A dreadfull Dragon with an hideous trayne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in her hand she held a mirrhour bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein her face she often vewed fayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in her selfe-lov’d semblance tooke delight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For she was wondrous faire, as any living wight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Of griesly Pluto she the daughter was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sad Proserpina, the Queene of hell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet did she thinke her pearelesse worth to pas</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That parentage, with pride so did she swell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thundring Jove, that high in heaven doth dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wield the world, she claymed for her syre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or if that any else did Jove excell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For to the highest she did still aspyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, if ought higher were than that, did it desyre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And proud Lucifera men did her call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That made her selfe a Queene, and crownd to be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet rightfull kingdome she had none at all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne heritage of native soveraintie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But did usurpe with wrong and tyrannie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the scepter which she now did hold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ruld her Realme with lawes, but pollicie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strong advizement of six wisards old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, with their counsels bad, her kingdome did uphold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as the Elfin knight in presence came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And false Duessa, seeming Lady fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A gentle Husher, Vanitie by name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made rowme, and passage for them did prepaire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So goodly brought them to the lowest stayre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her high throne; where they, on humble knee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Making obeysaunce, did the cause declare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why they were come her roiall state to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To prove the wide report of her great Majestee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With loftie eyes, halfe loth to looke so lowe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She thancked them in her disdainefull wise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne other grace vouchsafed them to showe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Princesse worthy; scarse them bad arise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her Lordes and Ladies all this while devise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Themselves to setten forth to straungers sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some frounce their curled heare in courtly guise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some prancke their ruffes; and others trimly dight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their gay attyre; each others greater pride does spight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Goodly they all that knight doe entertayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right glad with him to have increast their crew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to Duess’ each one himselfe did payne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All kindnesse and faire courtesie to shew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For in that court whylome her well they knew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet the stout Faerie mongst the middest crowd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thought all their glorie vaine in knightly vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that great Princesse too exceeding prowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That to strange knight no better countenance allowd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Suddein upriseth from her stately place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The roiall Dame, and for her coche doth call:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All hurtlen forth; and she, with princely pace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As faire Aurora in her purple pall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the East the dawning day doth call.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So forth she comes; her brightnes brode doth blaze.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The heapes of people, thronging in the hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe ride each other upon her to gaze:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her glorious glitter and light doth all mens eies amaze.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So forth she comes, and to her coche does clyme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adorned all with gold and girlonds gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemd as fresh as Flora in her prime;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strove to match, in roiall rich array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great Junoes golden chayre; the which, they say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gods stand gazing on, when she does ride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Joves high hous through heavens bras-paved way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drawne of fayre Pecocks, that excell in pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And full of Argus eyes their tayles dispredden wide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But this was drawne of six unequall beasts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which her six sage Counsellours did ryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Taught to obay their bestiall beheasts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With like conditions to their kindes applyde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which the first, that all the rest did guyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was sluggish Idlenesse, the nourse of sin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a slouthfull Asse he chose to ryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arayd in habit blacke, and amis thin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like to an holy Monck, the service to begin.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And in his hand his Portesse still he bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That much was worne, but therein little redd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For of devotion he had little care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still drownd in sleepe, and most of his daies dedd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Scarse could he once uphold his heavie hedd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To looken whether it were night or day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May seeme the wayne was very evill ledd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When such an one had guiding of the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That knew not whether right he went, or else astray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>From worldly cares himselfe he did esloyne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And greatly shunned manly exercise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From everie worke he chalenged essoyne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For contemplation sake: yet otherwise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His life he led in lawlesse riotise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which he grew to grievous malady;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For in his lustlesse limbs, through evil guise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A shaking fever raignd continually.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such one was Idlenesse, first of this company.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And by his side rode loathsome Gluttony,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deformed creature, on a filthie swyne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His belly was upblowne with luxury,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke with fatnesse swollen were his eyne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And like a Crane his necke was long and fyne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which he swallowed up excessive feast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For want whereof poore people oft did pyne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the way, most like a brutish beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He spued up his gorge, that all did him deteast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In greene vine leaves he was right fitly clad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For other clothes he could not weare for heate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on his head an yvie girland had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From under which fast trickled downe the sweat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still as he rode he somewhat still did eat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his hand did beare a bouzing can,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which he supt so oft, that on his seat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His dronken corse he scarse upholden can:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In shape and life more like a monster then a man.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Unfit he was for any worldly thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke unhable once to stirre or go;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not meet to be of counsell to a king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose mind in meat and drinke was drowned so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from his frend he seeldome knew his fo.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of diseases was his carcas blew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And a dry dropsie through his flesh did flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which by misdiet daily greater grew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such one was Gluttony, the second of that crew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And next to him rode lustfull Lechery</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a bearded Gote, whose rugged heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And whally eies (the signe of gelosy,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was like the person selfe whom he did beare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who rough, and blacke, and filthy, did appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unseemely man to please faire Ladies eye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet he of Ladies oft was loved deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When fairer faces were bid standen by:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O! who does know the bent of womens fantasy?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In a greene gowne he clothed was full faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which underneath did hide his filthinesse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his hand a burning hart he bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of vaine follies and new fanglenesse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he was false, and fraught with ficklenesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And learned had to love with secret lookes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And well could daunce, and sing with ruefulnesse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fortunes tell, and read in loving bookes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thousand other waies to bait his fleshly hookes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Inconstant man, that loved all he saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lusted after all that he did love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne would his looser life be tide to law,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But joyd weake wemens hearts to tempt, and prove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If from their loyall loves he might them move:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which lewdnes fild him with reprochfull pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that foule evill, which all men reprove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That rotts the marrow, and consumes the braine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such one was Lechery, the third of all this traine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And greedy Avarice by him did ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uppon a Camell loaden all with gold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two iron coffers hong on either side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With precious metall full as they might hold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his lap an heap of coine he told;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For of his wicked pelfe his God he made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto hell him selfe for money sold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Accursed usury was all his trade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And right and wrong ylike in equall ballaunce waide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His life was nigh unto deaths dore yplaste;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thred-bare cote, and cobled shoes, hee ware;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne scarse good morsell all his life did taste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But both from backe and belly still did spare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To fill his bags, and richesse to compare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet childe ne kinsman living had he none</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To leave them to; but thorough daily care</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To get, and nightly feare to lose his owne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He led a wretched life, unto himselfe unknowne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Most wretched wight, whom nothing might suffise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose greedy lust did lacke in greatest store;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose need had end, but no end covetise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose welth was want, whose plenty made him pore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who had enough, yett wished ever more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A vile disease: and eke in foote and hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A grievous gout tormented him full sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That well he could not touch, nor goe, nor stand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such one was Avarice, the fourth of this faire band.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And next to him malicious Envy rode</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a ravenous wolfe, and still did chaw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Between his cankred teeth a venemous tode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the poison ran about his chaw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But inwardly he chawed his owne maw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At neighbours welth, that made him ever sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For death it was, when any good he saw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wept, that cause of weeping none he had;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when he heard of harme he wexed wondrous glad.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All in a kirtle of discolourd say</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He clothed was, ypaynted full of eies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his bosome secretly there lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An hatefull Snake, the which his taile uptyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In many folds, and mortall sting implyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still as he rode he gnasht his teeth to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those heapes of gold with griple Covetyse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And grudged at the great felicitee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of proud Lucifera, and his owne companee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He hated all good workes and vertuous deeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him no lesse, that any like did use;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And who with gratious bread the hungry feeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His almes for want of faith he doth accuse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So every good to bad he doth abuse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the verse of famous Poets witt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He does backebite, and spightfull poison spues</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From leprous mouth on all that ever writt.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such one vile Envy was, that fifte in row did sitt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And him beside rides fierce revenging Wrath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a Lion, loth for to be led;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his hand a burning brond he hath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which he brandisheth about his hed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His eies did hurle forth sparcles fiery red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stared sterne on all that him beheld;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As ashes pale of hew, and seeming ded;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on his dagger still his hand he held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trembling through hasty rage when choler in him sweld,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His ruffin raiment all was staind with blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he had spilt, and all to rags yrent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through unadvized rashnes woxen wood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For of his hands he had no governement:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne car’d for blood in his avengement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when the furious fitt was overpast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His cruel facts he often would repent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, wilfull man, he never would forecast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How many mischieves should ensue his heedlesse hast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Full many mischiefes follow cruell Wrath:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abhorred bloodshed, and tumultuous strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unmanly murder, and unthrifty scath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bitter despight, with rancours rusty knife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fretting griefe, the enemy of life:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All these, and many evils moe haunt ire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The swelling Splene, and Frenzy raging rife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The shaking Palsey, and Saint Fraunces fire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such one was Wrath, the last of this ungodly tire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, after all, upon the wagon beame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rode Sathan with a smarting whip in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which he forward lasht the laesy teme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So oft as Slowth still in the mire did stand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Huge routs of people did about them band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Showting for joy; and still before their way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A foggy mist had covered all the land;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, underneath their feet, all scattered lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dead sculls and bones of men whose life had gone astray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So forth they marchen in this goodly sort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To take the solace of the open aire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in fresh flowring fields themselves to sport:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emongst the rest rode that false Lady faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The foule Duessa, next unto the chaire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of proud Lucifer’, as one of the traine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that good knight would not so nigh repaire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him selfe estraunging from their joyaunce vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose fellowship seemd far unfitt for warlike swaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So, having solaced themselves a space</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With pleasaunce of the breathing fields yfed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They backe retourned to the princely Place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereas an errant knight in armes ycled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heathnish shield, wherein with letters red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was writt <em xml:lang="fr">Sansjoy</em>, they new arrived find:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enflam’d with fury and fiers hardy hed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He seemd in hart to harbour thoughts unkind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And nourish bloody vengeaunce in his bitter mind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who, when the shamed shield of slaine <span xml:lang="fr">Sansfoy</span></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He spide with that same Faery champions page,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bewraying him that did of late destroy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His eldest brother; burning all with rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He to him lept, and that same envious gage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of victors glory from him snacht away:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But th’Elfin knight, which ought that warlike wage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disdaind to loose the meed he wonne in fray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, him rencountring fierce, reskewd the noble pray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith they gan to hurtlen greedily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Redoubted battaile ready to darrayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And clash their shields, and shake their swerds on hy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with their sturre they troubled all the traine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that great Queene, upon eternall paine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of high displeasure that ensewen might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Commaunded them their fury to refraine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, if that either to that shield had right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In equall lists they should the morrow next it fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ah dearest Dame,” quoth then the Paynim bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Pardon the error of enraged wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whome great griefe made forgett the raines to hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of reasons rule, to see this recreaunt knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No knight, but treachour full of false despight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shameful treason, who through guile hath slayn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The prowest knight that ever field did fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even stout <span xml:lang="fr">Sansfoy</span>, (O who can then refrayn?)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose shield he beares renverst, the more to heap disdayn.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And, to augment the glorie of his guile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His dearest love, the faire Fidessa, loe!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is there possessed of the traytour vile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who reapes the harvest sowen by his foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sowen in bloodie field, and bought with woe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That brothers hand shall dearely well requight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So be, O Queene! you equall favour showe.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him litle answerd th’angry Elfin knight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He never meant with words, but swords, to plead his right:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But threw his gauntlet, as a sacred pledge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His cause in combat the next day to try:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So been they parted both, with harts on edge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be aveng’d each on his enimy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That night they pas in joy and jollity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Feasting and courting both in bowre and hall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Steward was excessive Gluttony,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of his plenty poured forth to all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which doen, the Chamberlain, Slowth, did to rest them call.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now whenas darkesome night had all displayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her cole-blacke curtein over brightest skye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The warlike youthes, on dayntie couches layd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did chace away sweet sleepe from sluggish eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To muse on meanes of hoped victory.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But whenas Morpheus had with leaden mace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arrested all that courtly company,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uprose Duessa from her resting place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the Paynims lodging comes with silent pace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom broad awake she findes, in troublous fitt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fore-casting how his foe he might annoy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him amoves with speaches seeming fitt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Ah deare <span xml:lang="fr">Sansjoy</span>, next dearest to <span xml:lang="fr">Sansfoy</span>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cause of my new griefe, cause of my new joy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Joyous to see his ymage in mine eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And greevd to thinke how foe did him destroy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was the flowre of grace and chevalrye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo! his Fidessa, to thy secret faith I flye.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With gentle wordes he can her fayrely greet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bad say on the secrete of her hart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, sighing soft; “I learne that litle sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oft tempred is,” (quoth she,) “with muchell smart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For since my brest was launcht with lovely dart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of deare <span xml:lang="fr">Sansfoy</span>, I never joyed howre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in eternall woes my weaker hart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have wasted, loving him with all my powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for his sake have felt full many an heavie stowre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“At last, when perils all I weened past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hop’d to reape the crop of all my care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into new woes unweeting I was cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By this false faytor, who unworthie ware</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His worthie shield; whom he with guilefull snare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Entrapped slew, and brought to shamefull grave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me, silly maid, away with him he bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever since hath kept in darksom cave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that I would not yeeld that to <span xml:lang="fr">Sansfoy</span> I gave.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But since faire Sunne hath sperst that lowring clowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to my loathed life now shewes some light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under your beames I will me safely shrowd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From dreaded storme of his disdainfull spight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To you th’inheritance belonges by right</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of brothers prayse, to you eke longes his love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let not his love, let not his restlesse spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be unreveng’d, that calles to you above</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From wandring Stygian shores, where it doth endlesse move.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereto said he, “Faire Dame, be nought dismaid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For sorrowes past; their griefe is with them gone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne yet of present perill be affraid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For needlesse feare did never vantage none;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And helplesse hap it booteth not to mone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dead is <span xml:lang="fr">Sansfoy</span>, his vitall paines are past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though greeved ghost for vengeance deep do grone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He lives that shall him pay his dewties last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And guiltie Elfin blood shall sacrifice in hast.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O! but I feare the fickle freakes,” (quoth shee)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Of fortune false, and oddes of armes in field.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Why, dame,” (quoth he) “what oddes can ever bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where both doe fight alike, to win or yield?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Yea, but,” (quoth she) “he beares a charmed shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke enchaunted armes, that none can perce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne none can wound the man that does them wield.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Charmed or enchaunted,” answerd he then ferce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I no whitt reck; ne you the like need to reherce.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But, faire Fidessa, sithens fortunes guile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or enimies powre, hath now captived you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Returne from whence ye came, and rest a while,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till morrow next that I the Elfe subdew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with <span xml:lang="fr">Sansfoyes</span> dead dowry you endew.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Ah me! that is a double death,” (she said)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“With proud foes sight my sorrow to renew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where ever yet I be, my secret aide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall follow you.” So, passing forth, she him obaid.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-5" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The faithful knight in equal field</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Subdues his faithlesse foe;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whom false Duessa saves, and for</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">His cure to hell does goe.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The noble hart that harbours vertuous thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And is with childe of glorious great intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can never rest, untill it forth have brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th’eternall brood of glorie excellent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such restlesse passion did all night torment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The flaming corage of that Faery knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Devizing how that doughtie turnament</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With greatest honour he atchieven might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still did he wake, and still did watch for dawning light.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last, the golden Orientall gate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of greatest heaven gan to open fayre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Phoebus, fresh as brydegrome to his mate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came dauncing forth, shaking his deawie hayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hurld his glistring beams through gloomy ayre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when the wakeful Elfe perceiv’d, streight way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He started up, and did him selfe prepayre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In sunbright armes, and battailous array;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For with that Pagan proud he combatt will that day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And forth he comes into the commune hall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where earely waite him many a gazing eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet what end to straunger knights may fall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There many Minstrales maken melody,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To drive away the dull melancholy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many Bardes, that to the trembling chord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can tune their timely voices cunningly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many Chroniclers, that can record</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old loves, and warres for Ladies doen by many a Lord.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone after comes the cruell Sarazin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In woven maile all armed warily;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sternly lookes at him, who not a pin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Does care for looke of living creatures eye.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They bring them wines of Greece and Araby,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And daintie spices fetch from furthest Ynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To kindle heat of corage privily;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the wine a solemne oth they bynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>T’observe the sacred lawes of armes that are assynd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last forth comes that far renowmed Queene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With royall pomp and princely majestie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She is ybrought unto a paled greene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And placed under stately canapee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The warlike feates of both those knights to see.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On th’other side in all mens open vew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Duessa placed is, and on a tree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><span xml:lang="fr">Sansfoy</span> his shield is hangd with bloody hew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both those the lawrell girlonds to the victor dew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A shrilling trompett sownded from on hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto battaill bad them selves addresse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their shining shieldes about their wrestes they tye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And burning blades about their heades doe blesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The instruments of wrath and heavinesse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With greedy force each other doth assayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strike so fiercely, that they do impresse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deepe dinted furrowes in the battred mayle:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The yron walles to ward their blowes are weak and fraile.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Sarazin was stout and wondrous strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heaped blowes like yron hammers great;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For after blood and vengeance he did long:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The knight was fiers, and full of youthly heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doubled strokes, like dreaded thunders threat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all for praise and honour he did fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both stricken stryke, and beaten both doe beat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from their shields forth flyeth fine light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hewen helmets deepe shew marks of eithers might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So th’one for wrong, the other strives for right.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As when a Gryfon, seized of his pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Dragon fiers encountreth in his flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through widest ayre making his ydle way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That would his rightfull ravine rend away:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hideous horror both together smight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And souce so sore that they the heavens affray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wise Southsayer, seeing so sad sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’amazed vulgar telles of warres and mortall fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So th’one for wrong, the other strives for right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And each to deadly shame would drive his foe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cruell steele so greedily doth bight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In tender flesh, that streames of blood down flow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which the armes, that earst so bright did show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into a pure vermillion now are dyde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great ruth in all the gazers harts did grow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeing the gored woundes to gape so wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That victory they dare not wish to either side.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last the Paynim chaunst to cast his eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His suddein eye flaming with wrathfull fyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his brothers shield, which hong thereby:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith redoubled was his raging yre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said; “Ah! wretched sonne of wofull syre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doest thou sit wayling by blacke Stygian lake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whylest here thy shield is hangd for victors hyre?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, sluggish german, doest thy forces slake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To after-send his foe, that him may overtake?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Goe, caytive Elfe, him quickly overtake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soone redeeme from his long-wandring woe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Goe, guiltie ghost, to him my message make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I his shield have quit from dying foe.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith upon his crest he stroke him so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That twise he reeled, readie twise to fall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">End of the doubtfull battaile deemed tho</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The lookers on; and lowd to him gan call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The false Duessa, “Thine the shield, and I, and all!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as the Faerie heard his Ladie speake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of his swowning dreame he gan awake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And quickning faith, that earst was woxen weake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The creeping deadly cold away did shake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho mov’d with wrath, and shame, and Ladies sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all attonce he cast avengd to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with so’ exceeding furie at him strake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That forced him to stoupe upon his knee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had he not stouped so, he should have cloven bee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And to him said; “Goe now, proud Miscreant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thyselfe thy message do to german deare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alone he, wandring, thee too long doth want:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Goe say, his foe thy shield with his doth beare.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith his heavie hand he high gan reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him to have slaine; when lo! a darkesome clowd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon him fell: he no where doth appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But vanisht is. The Elfe him calls alowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But answer none receives; the darknes him does shrowd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In haste Duessa from her place arose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to him running said; “O! prowest knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ever Ladie to her love did chose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let now abate the terrour of your might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And quench the flame of furious despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bloodie vengeance: lo! th’infernall powres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Covering your foe with cloud of deadly night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have borne him hence to Plutoes balefull bowres:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The conquest yours, I yours, the shield and glory yours.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Not all so satisfide, with greedy eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He sought all round about, his thristy blade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bathe in blood of faithlesse enimy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who all that while lay hid in secret shade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He standes amazed how he thence should fade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last the trumpets Triumph sound on hie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And running Heralds humble homage made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Greeting him goodly with new victorie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to him brought the shield, the cause of enmitie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Wherewith he goeth to that soveraine Queene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And falling her before on lowly knee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To her makes present of his service seene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which she accepts with thankes and goodly gree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Greatly advauncing his gay chevalree:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So marcheth home, and by her takes the knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom all the people followe with great glee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shouting, and clapping all their hands on hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all the ayre it fills, and flyes to heaven bright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Home is he brought, and layd in sumptous bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where many skilfull leaches him abide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To salve his hurts, that yet still freshly bled.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In wine and oyle they wash his woundes wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And softly gan embalme on everie side:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the while most heavenly melody</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About the bed sweet musicke did divide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him to beguile of griefe and agony;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the while Duessa wept full bitterly.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when a wearie traveiler, that strayes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By muddy shore of broad seven-mouthed Nile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unweeting of the perillous wandring wayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth meete a cruell craftie Crocodile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, in false griefe hyding his harmefull guile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth weepe full sore, and sheddeth tender teares;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The foolish man, that pities all this while</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mournefull plight, is swallowed up unwares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgetfull of his owne that mindes an others cares.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So wept Duessa untill eventyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shyning lampes in Joves high house were light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then forth she rose, ne lenger would abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But comes unto the place where th’Hethen knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In slombring swownd, nigh voyd of vitall spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lay cover’d with inchaunted cloud all day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when she found, as she him left in plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wayle his wofull case she would not stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to the Easterne coast of heaven makes speedy way:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Where griesly Night, with visage deadly sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Phœbus chearefull face durst never vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in a foule blacke pitchy mantle clad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She findes forth comming from her darksome mew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where she all day did hide her hated hew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before the dore her yron charet stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Already harnessed for journey new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cole blacke steedes yborne of hellish brood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That on their rusty bits did champ as they were wood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who when she saw Duessa, sunny bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adornd with gold and jewels shining cleare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She greatly grew amazed at the sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And th’unacquainted light began to feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For never did such brightnes there appeare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And would have backe retyred to her cave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill the witches speach she gan to heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saying; “Yet, O thou dreaded Dame! I crave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abyde, till I have told the message which I have.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She stayd; and foorth Duessa gan proceede:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“O! thou most auncient Grandmother of all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More old then Jove, whom thou at first didst breede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that great house of Gods cælestiall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which wast begot in Dæmogorgons hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sawst the secrets of the world unmade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why suffredst thou thy Nephewes deare to fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Elfin sword most shamefully betrade?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo! where the stout <span xml:lang="fr">Sansjoy</span> doth sleepe in deadly shade.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And him before, I saw with bitter eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bold <span xml:lang="fr">Sansfoy</span> shrinck underneath his speare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now the pray of fowles in field he lyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor wayld of friends, nor layd on groning beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That whylome was to me too dearely deare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O! what of gods then boots it to be borne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If old Aveugles sonnes so evill heare?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or who shall not great Nightes children scorne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When two of three her Nephewes are so fowle forlorne?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Up, then! up, dreary Dame, of darknes Queene!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Go, gather up the reliques of thy race;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or else goe them avenge, and let be seene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That dreaded Night in brightest day hath place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And can the children of fayre light deface.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her feeling speaches some compassion mov’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hart, and chaunge in that great mothers face:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet pitty in her hart was never prov’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till then, for evermore she hated, never lov’d:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And said, “Deare daughter, rightly may I rew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fall of famous children borne of mee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And good successes which their foes ensew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But who can turne the stream of destinee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or breake the chayne of strong necessitee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which fast is tyde to Joves eternall seat?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sonnes of Day he favoureth, I see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by my ruines thinkes to make them great:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make one great by others losse is bad excheat.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Yet shall they not escape so freely all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For some shall pay the price of others guilt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he the man that made <span xml:lang="fr">Sansfoy</span> to fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall with his owne blood price that he hath spilt.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But what art thou, that telst of Nephews kilt?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“I, that do seeme not I, Duessa ame,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quoth she, “how ever now, in garments gilt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gorgeous gold arayd, I to thee came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Duessa I, the daughter of Deceipt and Shame.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then, bowing downe her aged backe, she kist</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wicked witch, saying, “In that fayre face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The false resemblaunce of Deceipt, I wist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did closely lurke; yet so true-seeming grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It carried, that I scarse in darksome place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could it discerne, though I the mother bee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of falshood, and roote of Duessaes race.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O welcome, child! whom I have longd to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now have seene unwares. Lo! now I goe with thee.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then to her yron wagon she betakes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with her beares the fowle welfavourd witch.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through mirkesome aire her ready way she makes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her twyfold Teme, of which two blacke as pitch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And two were browne, yet each to each unlich,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did softly swim away, ne ever stamp</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unlesse she chaunst their stubborne mouths to twitch;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, foming tarre, their bridles they would champ,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And trampling the fine element would fiercely ramp.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So well they sped, that they be come at length</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the place whereas the Paynim lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Devoid of outward sence and native strength,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Coverd with charmed cloud from vew of day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sight of men, since his late luckelesse fray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His cruell wounds, with cruddy bloud congeald,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They binden up so wisely as they may,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And handle softly, till they can be heald:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So lay him in her charett, close in night conceald.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, all the while she stood upon the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wakefull dogs did never cease to bay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As giving warning of th’unwonted sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which her yron wheeles did them affray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her darke griesly looke them much dismay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The messenger of death, the ghastly owle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With drery shriekes did also her bewray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hungry wolves continually did howle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At her abhorred face, so filthy and so fowle.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thence turning backe in silence softe they stole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And brought the heavy corse with easy pace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To yawning gulfe of deepe Avernus hole.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By that same hole an entraunce, darke and bace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With smoake and sulphur hiding all the place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Descends to hell: there creature never past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That backe retourned without heavenly grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But dreadfull Furies, which their chaines have brast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And damned sprights sent forth to make ill men aghast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By that same way the direfull dames doe drive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their mournefull charett, fild with rusty blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And downe to Plutoes house are come bilive:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which passing through, on every side them stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The trembling ghosts with sad amazed mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Chattring their iron teeth, and staring wide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With stony eies; and all the hellish brood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of feends infernall flockt on every side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To gaze on erthly wight that with the Night durst ride.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They pas the bitter waves of Acheron,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where many soules sit wailing woefully,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And come to fiery flood of Phlegeton,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereas the damned ghosts in torments fry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with sharp shrilling shriekes doe bootlesse cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cursing high Jove, the which them thither sent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The house of endlesse paine is built thereby,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which ten thousand sorts of punishment</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cursed creatures doe eternally torment.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Before the threshold dreadfull Cerberus</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His three deformed heads did lay along,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Curled with thousand adders venemous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lilled forth his bloody flaming tong:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At them he gan to reare his bristles strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And felly gnarre, untill Dayes enemy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did him appease; then downe his taile he hong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And suffered them to passen quietly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For she in hell and heaven had power equally.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There was Ixion turned on a wheele,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For daring tempt the Queene of heaven to sin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Sisyphus an huge round stone did reele</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against an hill, ne might from labour lin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There thristy Tantalus hong by the chin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Tityus fed a vultur on his maw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Typhœus joynts were stretched on a gin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Theseus condemned to endlesse slouth by law;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fifty sisters water in leke vessels draw.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They all, beholding worldly wights in place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Leave off their worke, unmindfull of their smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To gaze on them; who forth by them doe pace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till they be come unto the furthest part;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where was a Cave ywrought by wondrous art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deepe, darke, uneasy, dolefull, comfortlesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which sad Aesculapius far apart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emprisond was in chaines remedilesse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that Hippolytus rent corse he did redresse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hippolytus a jolly huntsman was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That wont in charett chace the foming bore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He all his Peeres in beauty did surpas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Ladies love as losse of time forbore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His wanton stepdame loved him the more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when she saw her offred sweets refusd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her love she turnd to hate, and him before</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His father fierce of treason false accusd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with her gealous termes his open eares abusd:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who, all in rage, his Sea-god syre besought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some cursed vengeaunce on his sonne to cast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From surging gulf two Monsters streight were brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With dread whereof his chacing steedes aghast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both charett swifte and huntsman overcast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His goodly corps, on ragged cliffs yrent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was quite dismembred, and his members chast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Scattered on every mountaine as he went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That of Hippolytus was lefte no moniment.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His cruell stepdame, seeing what was donne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her wicked daies with wretched knife did end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In death avowing th’innocence of her sonne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which hearing, his rash syre began to rend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His heare, and hasty tong that did offend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, gathering up the reliques of his smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By Dianes meanes, who was Hippolyts frend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them brought to Aesculape, that by his art</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did heale them all againe, and joyned every part.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such wondrous science in mans witt to rain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When Jove avizd, that could the dead revive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fates expired could renew again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of endlesse life he might him not deprive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But unto hell did thrust him downe alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With flashing thunderbolt ywounded sore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where, long remaining, he did alwaies strive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himselfe with salves to health for to restore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And slake the heavenly fire that raged evermore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There auncient Night arriving did alight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From her nigh weary wayne, and in her armes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Aesculapius brought the wounded knight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whome having softly disaraid of armes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho gan to him discover all his harmes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beseeching him with prayer and with praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If either salves, or oyles, or herbes, or charmes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A fordonne wight from dore of death mote raise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would at her request prolong her nephews daies.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ah Dame,” (quoth he) “thou temptest me in vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To dare the thing, which daily yet I rew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the old cause of my continued paine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With like attempt to like end to renew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is not enough, that, thrust from heaven dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here endlesse penaunce for one fault I pay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that redoubled crime with vengeaunce new</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou biddest me to eeke? Can Night defray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wrath of thundring Jove, that rules both night and day?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Not so,” (quoth she) “but, sith that heavens king</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From hope of heaven hath thee excluded quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why fearest thou, that canst not hope for thing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fearest not that more thee hurten might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now in the powre of everlasting Night?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Goe to then, O thou far renowmed sonne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of great Apollo! shew thy famous might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In medicine, that els hath to thee wonne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great pains, and greater praise, both never to be donne.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her words prevaild: And then the learned leach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His cunning hand gan to his wounds to lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all things els the which his art did teach:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which having seene, from thence arose away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The mother of dredd darknesse, and let stay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Aveugles sonne there in the leaches cure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, backe retourning, took her wonted way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To ronne her timely race, whilst Phoebus pure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In westerne waves his weary wagon did recure.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The false Duessa, leaving noyous Night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Returnd to stately pallace of Dame Pryde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where when she came, she found the Faery knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Departed thence; albee his woundes wyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not throughly heald unready were to ryde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Good cause he had to hasten thence away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For on a day his wary Dwarfe had spyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where in a dungeon deepe huge nombers lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of caytive wretched thralls, that wayled night and day:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A ruefull sight as could be seene with eie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whom he learned had in secret wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hidden cause of their captivitie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How mortgaging their lives to Covetise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through wastfull Pride and wanton Riotise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They were by law of that proud Tyrannesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Provokt with Wrath and Envyes false surmise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Condemned to that Dongeon mercilesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where they should live in wo, and dye in wretchednesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There was that great proud king of Babylon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That would compell all nations to adore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him as onely God to call upon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till, through celestiall doome thrown out of dore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into an Oxe he was transformd of yore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There also was king Crœsus, that enhaunst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His hart too high through his great richesse store;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And proud Antiochus, the which advaunst</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His cursed hand gainst God, and on his altares daunst.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And them long time before, great Nimrod was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That first the world with sword and fire warrayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after him old Ninus far did pas</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In princely pomp, of all the world obayd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There also was that mightie Monarch layd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Low under all, yet above all in pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That name of native syre did fowle upbrayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And would as Ammons sonne be magnifide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till, scornd of God and man, a shamefull death he dide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All these together in one heape were throwne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like carkases of beastes in butchers stall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in another corner wide were strowne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Antique ruins of the Romanes fall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great Romulus, the Grandsyre of them all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proud Tarquin, and too lordly Lentulus;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stout Scipio, and stubborne Hanniball;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ambitious Sylla, and sterne Marius;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High Caesar, great Pompey, and fiers Antonius.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Amongst these mightie men were wemen mixt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proud wemen, vaine, forgetfull of their yoke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bold Semiramis, whose sides transfixt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sonnes own blade her fowle reproches spoke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayre Sthenobœa, that her selfe did choke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With wilfull chord for wanting of her will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">High minded Cleopatra, that with stroke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Aspes sting her selfe did stoutly kill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thousands moe the like that did that dongeon fill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Besides the endlesse routes of wretched thralles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which thither were assembled day by day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From all the world, after their wofull falles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through wicked pride and wasted welthes decay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But most of all, which in that dongeon lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fell from high Princes courtes, or Ladies bowres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where they in ydle pomp, or wanton play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Consumed had their goods and thriftlesse howres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lastly thrown themselves into these heavy stowres.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whose case whenas the careful Dwarfe had tould,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made ensample of their mournfull sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto his Maister, he no lenger would</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There dwell in perill of like painefull plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But earely rose; and, ere that dawning light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Discovered had the world to heaven wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He by a privy Posterne tooke his flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of no envious eyes he mote be spyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, doubtlesse, death ensewd if any him descryde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Scarse could he footing find in that fowle way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For many corses, like a great Lay-stall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of murdred men, which therein strowed lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without remorse or decent funerall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which al through that great Princesse pride did fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And came to shamefull end. And them besyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth ryding underneath the castell wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Donghill of dead carcases he spyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dreadfull spectacle of that sad house of Pryde.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-6" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>From lawlesse lust by wondrous grace</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Fayre Una is releast:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whom salvage nation does adore,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And learnes her wise beheast.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>As when a ship, that flyes fayre under sayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An hidden rocke escaped hath unwares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That lay in waite her wrack for to bewaile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Marriner yet halfe amazed stares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At perill past, and yet in doubt ne dares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To joy at his foolhappie oversight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So doubly is distrest twixt joy and cares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dreadlesse corage of this Elfin knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Having escapt so sad ensamples in his sight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet sad he was, that his too hastie speed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fayre Duess’ had forst him leave behind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet more sad, that Una, his deare dreed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her truth had staynd with treason so unkind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet cryme in her could never creature find;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But for his love, and for her own selfe sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She wandred had from one to other Ynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him for to seeke, ne ever would forsake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till her unwares the fiers <span xml:lang="fr">Sansloy</span> did overtake:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who, after Archimagoes fowle defeat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Led her away into a forest wilde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, turning wrathfull fyre to lustfull heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With beastly sin thought her to have defilde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made the vassall of his pleasures vilde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet first he cast by treatie, and by traynes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her to persuade that stubborne fort to yilde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For greater conquest of hard love he gaynes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That workes it to his will, then he that it constraines.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With fawning wordes he courted her a while;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, looking lovely and oft sighing sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her constant hart did tempt with diverse guile.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wordes, and lookes, and sighes she did abhore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As rock of Diamond stedfast evermore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet for to feed his fyrie lustfull eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He snatcht the vele that hong her face before:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan her beautie shyne as brightest skye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And burnt his beastly hart t’efforce her chastitye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So when he saw his flatt’ring artes to fayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And subtile engines bett from batteree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With greedy force he gan the fort assayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof he weend possessed soone to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And win rich spoile of ransackt chastitee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah heavens! that doe this hideous act behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heavenly virgin thus outraged see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How can ye vengeance just so long withhold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hurle not flashing flames upon that Paynim bold?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The pitteous mayden, carefull, comfortlesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Does throw out thrilling shriekes, and shrieking cryes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The last vaine helpe of wemens great distresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with loud plaintes importuneth the skyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That molten starres doe drop like weeping eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Phœbus, flying so most shamefull sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His blushing face in foggy cloud implyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hydes for shame. What witt of mortal wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can now devise to quitt a thrall from such a plight?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eternall providence, exceeding thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where none appeares can make her selfe a way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A wondrous way it for this Lady wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From Lyons clawes to pluck the gryped pray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her shrill outcryes and shrieks so loud did bray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the woodes and forestes did resownd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A troupe of Faunes and Satyres far away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within the wood were dauncing in a rownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whiles old Sylvanus slept in shady arber sownd:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who, when they heard that pitteous strained voice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In haste forsooke their rurall meriment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ran towardes the far rebownded noyce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet what wight so loudly did lament.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the place they come incontinent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when the raging Sarazin espyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A rude, mishapen, monstrous rablement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose like he never saw, he durst not byde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But got his ready steed, and fast away gan ryde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The wyld wood-gods, arrived in the place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There find the virgin, doolfull, desolate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With ruffled rayments, and fayre blubbred face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As her outrageous foe had left her late;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And trembling yet through feare of former hate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All stand amazed at so uncouth sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gin to pittie her unhappie state:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All stand astonied at her beautie bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In their rude eyes unworthie of so wofull plight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She, more amazd, in double dread doth dwell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every tender part for feare does shake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As when a greedy Wolfe, through honger fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A seely Lamb far from the flock does take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whom he meanes his bloody feast to make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Lyon spyes fast running towards him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The innocent pray in hast he does forsake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, quitt from death, yet quakes in every lim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With chaunge of feare, to see the Lyon looke so grim.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such fearefull fitt assaid her trembling hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne word to speake, ne joynt to move, she had;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The salvage nation feele her secret smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And read her sorrow in her count’nance sad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their frowning forheades, with rough hornes yclad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rustick horror, all asyde doe lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, gently grenning, shew a semblance glad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To comfort her; and, feare to put away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their backward bent knees teach her humbly to obay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The doubtfull Damzell dare not yet committ</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her single person to their barbarous truth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But still twixt feare and hope amazd does sitt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Late learnd what harme to hasty trust ensu’th.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They, in compassion of her tender youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wonder of her beautie soverayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are wonne with pitty and unwonted ruth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, all prostrate upon the lowly playne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doe kisse her feete, and fawne on her with count’nance fayne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Their harts she ghesseth by their humble guise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yieldes her to extremitie of time:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So from the ground she fearelesse doth arise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And walketh forth without suspect of crime.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They, all as glad as birdes of joyous Pryme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence lead her forth, about her dauncing round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shouting, and singing all a shepheards ryme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with greene braunches strowing all the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do worship her as Queene with olive girlond cround.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And all the way their merry pipes they sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the woods with doubled Eccho ring;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with their horned feet doe weare the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Leaping like wanton kids in pleasant Spring.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So towards old Sylvanus they her bring;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, with the noyse awaked, commeth out</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet the cause, his weake steps governing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And aged limbs on cypresse stadle stout;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with an yvie twyne his waste is girt about.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Far off he wonders what them makes so glad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or Bacchus merry fruit they did invent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or Cybeles franticke rites have made them mad:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They, drawing nigh, unto their God present</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That flowre of fayth and beautie excellent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The God himselfe, vewing that mirrhour rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stood long amazd, and burnt in his intent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His owne fayre Dryope now he thinkes not faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Pholoe fowle, when her to this he doth compaire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The woodborne people fall before her flat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And worship her as Goddesse of the wood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And old Sylvanus selfe bethinkes not what</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To thinke of wight so fayre, but gazing stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In doubt to deeme her borne of earthly brood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes dame Venus selfe he seemes to see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Venus never had so sober mood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes Diana he her takes to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But misseth bow and shaftes, and buskins to her knee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By vew of her he ginneth to revive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His ancient love, and dearest Cyparisse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And calles to mind his pourtraiture alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How fayre he was, and yet not fayre to this;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And how he slew with glauncing dart amisse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A gentle Hynd, the which the lovely boy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did love as life, above all worldly blisse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For griefe whereof the lad n’ould after joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But pynd away in anguish and selfe-wild annoy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The wooddy nymphes, faire Hamadryades,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her to behold do thither runne apace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the troupe of light-foot Naiades</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flocke all about to see her lovely face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when they vewed have her heavenly grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They envy her in their malitious mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fly away for feare of fowle disgrace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all the Satyres scorne their woody kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And henceforth nothing faire but her on earth they find.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Glad of such lucke, the luckelesse lucky mayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did her content to please their feeble eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And long time with that salvage people stayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To gather breath in many miseryes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">During which time her gentle wit she plyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To teach them truth, which worshipt her in vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made her th’Image of Idolatryes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when their bootlesse zeale she did restrayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From her own worship, they her Asse would worship fayn.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It fortuned, a noble warlike knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By just occasion to that forrest came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke his kindred, and the lignage right</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whence he tooke his weldeserved name:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He had in armes abroad wonne muchell fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fild far landes with glorie of his might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Plaine, faithfull, true, and enimy of shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever lov’d to fight for Ladies right;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in vaine glorious frayes he litle did delight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A Satyres sonne, yborne in forrest wyld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By straunge adventure as it did betyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there begotten of a Lady myld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayre Thyamis, the daughter of Labryde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was in sacred bandes of wedlocke tyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Therion, a loose unruly swayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who had more joy to raunge the forrest wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chase the salvage beast with busie payne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then serve his Ladies love, and waste in pleasures vayne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The forlorne mayd did with loves longing burne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And could not lacke her lovers company;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to the woods she goes, to serve her turne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seeke her spouse that from her still does fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And followes other game and venery:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Satyre chaunst her wandring for to finde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, kindling coles of lust in brutish eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The loyall linkes of wedlocke did unbinde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made her person thrall unto his beastly kind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So long in secret cabin there he held</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her captive to his sensuall desyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that with timely fruit her belly sweld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bore a boy unto that salvage syre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then home he suffred her for to retyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ransome leaving him the late-borne childe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom, till to ryper yeares he gan aspyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He nousled up in life and manners wilde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Emongst wild beastes and woods, from lawes of men exilde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For all he taught the tender ymp was but</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To banish cowardize and bastard feare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His trembling hand he would him force to put</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the Lyon and the rugged Beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from the she Beares teats her whelps to teare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke wyld roring Buls he would him make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tame, and ryde their backes, not made to beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the Robuckes in flight to overtake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That everie beast for feare of him did fly, and quake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereby so fearlesse and so fell he grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That his own syre, and maister of his guise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did often tremble at his horrid vew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oft, for dread of hurt, would him advise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The angry beastes not rashly to despise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor too much to provoke; for he would learne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Lyon stoup to him in lowly wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(A lesson hard) and make the Libbard sterne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leave roaring, when in rage he for revenge did earne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And for to make his powre approved more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wyld beastes in yron yokes he would compell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The spotted Panther, and the tusked Bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Pardale swift, and the Tigre cruell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Antelope, and Wolfe both fiers and fell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And them constraine in equall teme to draw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such joy he had their stubborne harts to quell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sturdie courage tame with dreadfull aw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That his beheast they feared as a tyrans law.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His loving mother came upon a day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the woodes, to see her little sonne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chaunst unwares to meet him in the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After his sportes and cruell pastime donne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When after him a Lyonesse did runne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That roaring all with rage did lowd requere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her children deare, whom he away had wonne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Lyon whelpes she saw how he did beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lull in rugged armes withouten childish feare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The fearefull Dame all quaked at the sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And turning backe gan fast to fly away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill, with love revokt from vaine affright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She hardly yet perswaded was to stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then to him these womanish words gan say:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Ah Satyrane, my dearling and my joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For love of me leave off this dreadfull play;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To dally thus with death is no fit toy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go, find some other play-fellowes, mine own sweet boy.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In these and like delightes of bloody game</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He trayned was, till ryper years he raught;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there abode, whylst any beast of name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Walkt in that forrest, whom he had not taught</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To feare his force: and then his courage haught</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Desyrd of forreine foemen to be knowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And far abroad for straunge adventures sought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which his might was never overthrowne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But through al Faery lond his famous worth was blown.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet evermore it was his maner faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After long labours and adventures spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto those native woods for to repaire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see his syre and ofspring auncient.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now he thither came for like intent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where he unwares the fairest Una found;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Straunge Lady in so straunge habiliment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Teaching the Satyres, which her sat around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trew sacred lore, which from her sweet lips did redound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He wondred at her wisedome hevenly rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose like in womens witt he never knew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, when her curteous deeds he did compare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan her admire, and her sad sorrowes rew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blaming of Fortune, which such troubles threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And joyd to make proofe of her cruelty</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On gentle Dame, so hurtlesse and so trew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thenceforth he kept her goodly company,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And learnd her discipline of faith and verity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But she, all vowd unto the Redcrosse Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His wandring perill closely did lament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne in this new acquaintaunce could delight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But her deare heart with anguish did torment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all her witt in secret counsels spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How to escape. At last in privy wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Satyrane she shewed her intent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, glad to gain such favour, gan devise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How with that pensive Maid he best might thence arise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So on a day, when Satyres all were gone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To do their service to Sylvanus old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gentle virgin, left behinde alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He led away with corage stout and bold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Too late it was to Satyres to be told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ever hope recover her againe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In vaine he seekes that having cannot hold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So fast he carried her with carefull paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they the woods are past, and come now to the plaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The better part now of the lingring day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They traveild had, whenas they far espide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A weary wight forwandring by the way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And towards him they gan in haste to ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weete of newes that did abroad betide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or tidings of her knight of the Redcrosse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he them spying gan to turne aside</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For feare, as seemd, or for some feigned losse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More greedy they of newes fast towards him do crosse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A silly man, in simple weeds forworne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soild with dust of the long dried way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His sandales were with toilsome travell torne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And face all tand with scorching sunny ray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he had traveild many a sommers day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through boyling sands of Arabie and Ynde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his hand a Jacobs staffe, to stay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His weary limbs upon; and eke behind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His scrip did hang, in which his needments he did bind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The knight, approching nigh, of him inquerd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tidings of warre, and of adventures new;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But warres, nor new adventures, none he herd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Una gan to aske, if ought he knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or heard abroad of that her champion trew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in his armour bare a croslet red?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Ay me! Deare dame,” (quoth he) “well may I rew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tell the sad sight which mine eies have red;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These eies did see that knight both living and eke ded.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That cruell word her tender hart so thrild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That suddein cold did ronne through every vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stony horrour all her sences fild</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With dying fitt, that downe she fell for paine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The knight her lightly reared up againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And comforted with curteous kind reliefe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, wonne from death, she bad him tellen plaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The further processe of her hidden griefe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lesser pangs can beare who hath endur’d the chief.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then gan the Pilgrim thus: “I chaunst this day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This fatall day that shall I ever rew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see two knights, in travell on my way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(A sory sight) arraung’d in batteill new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both breathing vengeaunce, both of wrathfull hew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My feareful flesh did tremble at their strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see their blades so greedily imbrew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, dronke with blood, yet thristed after life:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What more? the Redcrosse knight was slain with Paynim knife.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ah! dearest Lord,” (quoth she) “how might that bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he the stoutest knight that ever wonne?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Ah! dearest dame,” (quoth hee) “how might I see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The thing that might not be, and yet was donne?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Where is,” (said Satyrane) “that Paynims sonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That him of life, and us of joy, hath refte?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Not far away,” (quoth he) “he hence doth wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Foreby a fountaine, where I late him lefte</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Washing his bloody wounds, that through the steele were cleft.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith the knight thence marched forth in hast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles Una, with huge heavinesse opprest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could not for sorrow follow him so fast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soone he came, as he the place had ghest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereas that Pagan proud him selfe did rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In secret shadow by a fountaine side:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even he it was, that earst would have supprest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Una; whom when Satyrane espide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With foule reprochfull words he boldly him defide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And said; “Arise, thou cursed Miscreaunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hast with knightlesse guile, and trecherous train,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire knighthood fowly shamed, and doest vaunt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That good knight of the Redcrosse to have slain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arise, and with like treason now maintain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy guilty wrong, or els thee guilty yield.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Sarazin, this hearing, rose amain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, catching up in hast his three-square shield</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shining helmet, soone him buckled to the field.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, drawing nigh him, said; “Ah! misborn Elfe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In evill houre thy foes thee hither sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Anothers wrongs to wreak upon thy selfe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet ill thou blamest me for having blent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My name with guile and traiterous intent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Redcrosse knight, perdie, I never slew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But had he beene where earst his armes were lent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th’enchaunter vaine his errour should not rew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thou his errour shalt, I hope, now proven trew.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith they gan, both furious and fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To thunder blowes, and fiersly to assaile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each other, bent his enimy to quell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with their force they perst both plate and maile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made wide furrowes in their fleshes fraile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it would pitty any living eie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Large floods of blood adowne their sides did raile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But floods of blood could not them satisfie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both hongred after death; both chose to win, or die.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So long they fight, and full revenge pursue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, fainting, each themselves to breathen lett,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, ofte refreshed, battell oft renue.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As when two Bores, with rancling malice mett,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their gory sides fresh bleeding fiercely frett;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Til breathlesse both themselves aside retire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where foming wrath their cruell tuskes they whett,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And trample th’earth, the whiles they may respire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then backe to fight againe, new breathed and entire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So fiersly, when these knights had breathed once,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They gan to fight retourne, increasing more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their puissant force, and cruell rage attonce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With heaped strokes more hugely then before;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with their drery wounds, and bloody gore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They both, deformed, scarsely could bee known.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By this, sad Una fraught with anguish sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Led with their noise which through the aire was thrown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arriv’d wher they in erth their fruitles blood had sown.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom all so soone as that proud Sarazin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Espide, he gan revive the memory</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his leud lusts, and late attempted sin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lefte the doubtfull battell hastily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To catch her, newly offred to his eie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Satyrane, with strokes him turning, staid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sternely bad him other businesse plie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then hunt the steps of pure unspotted Maid:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherewith he al enrag’d these bitter speaches said.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O foolish faeries’ sonne! what fury mad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath thee incenst to hast thy dolefull fate?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were it not better I that Lady had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then that thou hadst repented it too late?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most sencelesse man he, that himselfe doth hate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To love another: Lo! then, for thine ayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here take thy lovers token on thy pate.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So they to fight; the whiles the royall Mayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fledd farre away, of that proud Paynim sore afrayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But that false Pilgrim, which that leasing told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being in deed old Archimage, did stay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In secret shadow all this to behold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And much rejoyced in their bloody fray:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when he saw the Damsell passe away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He left his stond, and her pursewd apace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hope to bring her to her last decay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But for to tell her lamentable cace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke this battels end, will need another place.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-7" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The Redcrosse knight is captive made</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">By Gyaunt proud apprest:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Prince Arthure meets with Una great</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Ly with those news distrest.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>What man so wise, what earthly witt so ware,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As to discry the crafty cunning traine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which deceipt doth maske in visour faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cast her coulours, died deepe in graine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeme like truth, whose shape she well can faine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fitting gestures to her purpose frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The guiltlesse man with guile to entertaine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great maistresse of her art was that false Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The false Duessa, cloked with Fidessaes name.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who when, returning from the drery Night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She fownd not in that perilous hous of Pryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where she had left the noble Redcrosse knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her hoped pray, she would no lenger byde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But forth she went to seeke him far and wide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere long she fownd, whereas he wearie sate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To reste him selfe foreby a fountaine syde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disarmed all of yron-coted Plate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by his side his steed the grassy forage ate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hee feedes upon the cooling shade, and bayes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His sweatie forehead in the breathing wynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which through the trembling leaves full gently playes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein the chearefull birds of sundry kynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe chaunt sweet musick to delight his mynd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The witch approching gan him fayrely greet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with reproch of carelesnes unkynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upbrayd, for leaving her in place unmeet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With fowle words tempring faire, soure gall with hony sweet.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Unkindnesse past, they gan of solace treat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bathe in pleasaunce of the joyous shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which shielded them against the boyling heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with greene boughes decking a gloomy glade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About the fountaine like a girlond made;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose bubbling wave did ever freshly well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever would through fervent sommer fade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sacred Nymph, which therein wont to dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was out of Dianes favor, as it then befell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The cause was this: one day, when Phœbe fayre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all her band was following the chace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This nymph, quite tyr’d with heat of scorching ayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Satt downe to rest in middest of the race:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The goddesse wroth gan fowly her disgrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And badd the waters, which from her did flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be such as she her selfe was then in place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thenceforth her waters wexed dull and slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all that drinke thereof do faint and feeble grow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hereof this gentle knight imweeting was;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lying downe upon the sandie graile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dronke of the streame, as cleare as christall glas:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones his manly forces gan to fayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mightie strong was turnd to feeble frayle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His chaunged powres at first them selves not felt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till crudled cold his corage gan assayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cheareful blood in fayntnes chill did melt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which like a fever fit through all his bodie swelt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet goodly court he made still to his Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pourd out in loosnesse on the grassy grownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both carelesse of his health, and of his fame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till at the last he heard a dreadfull sownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which through the wood loud bellowing did rebownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the earth for terror seemd to shake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And trees did tremble. Th’Elfe, therewith astownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upstarted lightly from his looser make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his unready weapons gan in hand to take.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But ere he could his armour on him dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or gett his shield, his monstrous enimy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sturdie steps came stalking in his sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An hideous Geaunt, horrible and hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with his tallnesse seemd to threat the skye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The ground eke groned under him for dreed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His living like saw never living eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne durst behold: his stature did exceed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hight of three the tallest sonnes of mortall seed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The greatest Earth his uncouth mother was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And blustring Æolus his boasted syre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who with his breath, which through the world doth pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her hollow womb did secretly inspyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fild her hidden caves with stormie yre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she conceiv’d; and trebling the dew time</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which the wombes of wemen doe expyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Brought forth this monstrous masse of earthly slyme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Puft up with emptie wynd, and fild with sinfull cryme.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So growen great, through arrogant delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of th’high descent whereof he was yborne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through presumption of his matchlesse might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All other powres and knighthood he did scorne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such now he marcheth to this man forlorne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And left to losse; his stalking steps are stayde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a snaggy Oke, which he had torne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of his mothers bowelles, and it made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His mortall mace, wherewith his foemen he dismayde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That, when the knight he spyde, he gan advaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With huge force and insupportable mayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And towardes him with dreadfull fury praunce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who haplesse, and eke hopelesse, all in vaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did to him pace sad battaile to darrayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disarmd, disgraste, and inwardly dismayde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke so faint in every joynt and vayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through that fraile fountain which him feeble made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That scarsely could he weeld his bootlesse single blade.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Geaunt strooke so maynly mercilesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That could have overthrowne a stony towre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, were not hevenly grace that did him blesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He had beene pouldred all as thin as flowre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he was wary of that deadly stowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lightly lept from underneath the blow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet so exceeding was the villeins powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with the winde it did him overthrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all his sences stound that still he lay full low.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when that divelish yron Engin, wrought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In deepest Hell, and framd by Furies skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With windy Nitre and quick Sulphur fraught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ramd with bollet rownd, ordaind to kill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Conceiveth fyre, the heavens it doth fill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With thundring noyse, and all the ayre doth choke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none can breath, nor see, nor heare at will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through smouldry cloud of duskish stincking smoke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That th’only breath him daunts, who hath escapt the stroke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So daunted when the Geaunt saw the knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His heavie hand he heaved up on hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him to dust thought to have battred quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill Duessa loud to him gan crye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“O great Orgoglio! greatest under skye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O! hold thy mortall hand for Ladies sake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hold for my sake, and doe him not to dye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But vanquisht thine eternall bondslave make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And me, thy worthy meed, unto thy Leman take.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He hearkned, and did stay from further harmes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To gayne so goodly guerdon as she spake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So willingly she came into his armes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who her as willingly to grace did take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And was possessed of his newfound make.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then up he tooke the slombred sencelesse corse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, ere he could out of his swowne awake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him to his castle brought with hastie forse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in a Dongeon deepe him threw without remorse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>From that day forth Duessa was his deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And highly honourd in his haughtie eye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gave her gold and purple pall to weare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And triple crowne set on her head full hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her endowd with royall majestye.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, for to make her dreaded more of men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And peoples hartes with awfull terror tye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A monstrous beast ybredd in filthy fen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He chose, which he had kept long time in darksom den.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such one it was, as that renowmed Snake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which great Alcides in Stremona slew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long fostred in the filth of Lerna lake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose many heades, out budding ever new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did breed him endlesse labor to subdew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But this same Monster much more ugly was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For seven great heads out of his body grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An yron brest, and back of scaly bras,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all embrewd in blood his eyes did shine as glas.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His tayle was stretched out in wondrous length,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to the hous of hevenly gods it raught:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with extorted powre, and borrow’d strength,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The everburning lamps from thence it braught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And prowdly threw to ground, as things of naught;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And underneath his filthy feet did tread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sacred thinges, and holy heastes foretaught.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon this dreadfull Beast with sevenfold head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sett the false Duessa, for more aw and dread.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The wofull Dwarfe, which saw his maisters fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles he had keeping of his grasing steed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And valiant knight become a caytive thrall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When all was past, tooke up his forlorne weed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mightie Armour, missing most at need;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His silver shield, now idle, maisterlesse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His poynant speare that many made to bleed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rueful moniments of heavinesse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with them all departes to tell his great distresse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He had not travaild long, when on the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He wofull Lady, wofull Una, met,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fast flying from that Paynims greedy pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilest Satyrane him from pursuit did let:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who when her eyes she on the Dwarf had set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saw the signes that deadly tydinges spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She fell to ground for sorrowfull regret,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lively breath her sad brest did forsake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet might her pitteous hart be seene to pant and quake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The messenger of so unhappie newes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would faine have dyde: dead was his hart within,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet outwardly some little comfort shewes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last, recovering hart, he does begin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To rubb her temples, and to chaufe her chin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And everie tender part does tosse and turne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So hardly he the flitted life does win</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto her native prison to retourne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then gins her grieved ghost thus to lament and mourne:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ye dreary instruments of dolefull sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That doe this deadly spectacle behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why doe ye lenger feed on loathed light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or liking find to gaze on earthly mould,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith cruell fates the carefull threds unfould,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which my life and love together tyde?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now let the stony dart of sencelesse cold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perce to my hart, and pas through everie side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let eternall night so sad sight fro me hyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O lightsome day! the lampe of highest Jove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First made by him mens wandring wayes to guyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When darknesse he in deepest dongeon drove;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Henceforth thy hated face for ever hyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shut up heavens windowes shyning wyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For earthly sight can nought but sorrow breed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And late repentance which shall long abyde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mine eyes no more on vanitie shall feed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But seeled up with death shall have their deadly meed.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then downe againe she fell unto the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he her quickly reared up againe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrise did she sinke adowne in deadly swownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thrise he her reviv’d with busie paine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last when life recover’d had the raine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And over-wrestled his strong enimy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With foltring tong, and trembling everie vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Tell on,” (quoth she) “the wofull Tragedy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which these reliques sad present unto mine eye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Tempestuous fortune hath spent all her spight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thrilling sorrow throwne his utmost dart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy sad tong cannot tell more heavy plight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then that I feele, and harbour in mine hart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who hath endur’d the whole can beare ech part.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If death it be, it is not the first wound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That launched hath my brest with bleeding smart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Begin, and end the bitter balefull stound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If lesse then that I feare, more favour I have found.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then gan the Dwarfe the whole discourse declare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The subtile traines of Archimago old;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wanton loves of false Fidessa fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bought with the blood of vanquisht Paynim bold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wretched payre transformd to treën mould;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The house of Pryde, and perilles round about;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The combat which he with <span xml:lang="fr">Sansjoy</span> did hould;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The lucklesse conflict with the Gyaunt stout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein captiv’d, of life or death he stood in doubt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She heard with patience all unto the end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strove to maister sorrowfull assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which greater grew the more she did contend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And almost rent her tender hart in tway;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And love fresh coles unto her fire did lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For greater love, the greater is the losse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was never Lady loved dearer day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then she did love the knight of the Redcrosse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For whose deare sake so many troubles her did tosse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last when fervent sorrow slaked was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She up arose, resolving him to find</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alive or dead; and forward forth doth pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All as the Dwarfe the way to her assynd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evermore, in constant carefull mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She fedd her wound with fresh renewed bale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long tost with stormes, and bet with bitter wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">High over hills, and lowe adowne the dale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She wandred many a wood, and measurd many a vale.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last she chaunced by good hap to meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A goodly knight, faire marching by the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Together with his Squyre, arayed meet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His glitterand armour shined far away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like glauncing light of Phœbus brightest ray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From top to toe no place appeared bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That deadly dint of steele endanger may.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Athwart his brest a bauldrick brave he ware,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That shind, like twinkling stars, with stones most pretious rare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And in the midst thereof one pretious stone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of wondrous worth, and eke of wondrous mights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shapt like a Ladies head, exceeding shone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like Hesperus emongst the lesser lights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strove for to amaze the weaker sights:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereby his mortall blade full comely hong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In yvory sheath, ycarv’d with curious slights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose hilts were burnisht gold, and handle strong</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mother perle; and buckled with a golden tong.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His haughtie Helmet, horrid all with gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both glorious brightnesse and great terrour bredd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all the crest a Dragon did enfold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With greedie pawes, and over all did spredd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His golden winges: his dreadfull hideous hedd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Close couched on the bever, seemd to throw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From flaming mouth bright sparckles fiery redd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That suddeine horrour to faint hartes did show;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And scaly tayle was stretcht adowne his back full low.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Upon the top of all his loftie crest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A bounch of heares discolourd diversly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sprincled pearle and gold full richly drest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did shake, and seemd to daunce for jollity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to an almond tree ymounted hye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On top of greene Selinis all alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With blossoms brave bedecked daintily;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose tender locks do tremble every one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At everie little breath that under heaven is blowne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His warlike shield all closely cover’d was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne might of mortall eye be ever seene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not made of steele, nor of enduring bras,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such earthly mettals soon consumed beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all of Diamond perfect pure and cleene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It framed was, one massy entire mould,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hewen out of Adamant rocke with engines keene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That point of speare it never percen could,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne dint of direfull sword divide the substance would.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The same to wight he never wont disclose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But whenas monsters huge he would dismay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or daunt unequall armies of his foes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or when the flying heavens he would affray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For so exceeding shone his glistring ray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Phœbus golden face it did attaint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As when a cloud his beames doth overlay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And silver Cynthia wexed pale and faynt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when her face is staynd with magicke arts constraint.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>No magicke arts hereof had any might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor bloody wordes of bold Enchaunters call;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all that was not such as seemd in sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before that shield did fade, and suddeine fall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when him list the raskall routes appall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Men into stones therewith he could transmew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stones to dust, and dust to nought at all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, when him list the prouder lookes subdew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would them gazing blind, or turne to other hew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne let it seeme that credence this exceedes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he that made the same was knowne right well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To have done much more admirable deedes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It Merlin was, which whylome did excell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All living wightes in might of magicke spell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both shield and sword, and armour all he wrought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For this young Prince, when first to armes he fell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when he dyde, the Faery Queene it brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Faerie lond, where yet it may be seene, if sought:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A gentle youth, his dearely loved Squire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His speare of heben wood behind him bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose harmeful head, thrise heated in the fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had riven many a brest with pikehead square:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A goodly person, and could menage faire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His stubborne steed with curbed canon bitt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who under him did trample as the aire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chauft that any on his backe should sitt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The yron rowels into frothy fome he bitt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whenas this knight nigh to the Lady drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With lovely court he gan her entertaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when he heard her answers loth, he knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some secret sorrow did her heart distraine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to allay, and calme her storming paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire feeling words he wisely gan display,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for her humor fitting purpose faine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tempt the cause it selfe for to bewray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherewith enmovd, these bleeding words she gan to say.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“What worlds delight, or joy of living speach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can hart, so plungd in sea of sorrowes deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heaped with so huge misfortunes, reach?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The carefull cold beginneth for to creep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in my heart his yron arrow steep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone as I thinke upon my bitter bale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such helplesse harmes yts better hidden keep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then rip up griefe where it may not availe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My last left comfort is my woes to weepe and waile.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ah Lady deare,” quoth then the gentle knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Well may I ween your griefe is wondrous great;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For wondrous great griefe groneth in my spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles thus I heare you of your sorrowes treat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, woefull Lady, let me you intrete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For to unfold the anguish of your hart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mishaps are maistred by advice discrete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And counsell mitigates the greatest smart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Found never help who never would his hurts impart.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O, but,” (quoth she) “great griefe will not be tould,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And can more easily be thought then said.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Right so,” (quoth he) “but he that never would</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could never: will to might gives greatest aid.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“But griefe,” (quoth she) “does greater grow displaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If then it find not helpe, and breeds despaire.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Despaire breeds not,” (quoth he) “where faith is staid.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“No faith so fast,” (quoth she) “but flesh does paire.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Flesh may empaire,” (quoth he) “but reason can repaire.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His goodly reason, and well-guided speach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So deepe did settle in her gracious thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her perswaded to disclose the breach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which love and fortune in her heart had wrought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said; “Faire Sir, I hope good hap hath brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You to inquere the secrets of my griefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that your wisedome will direct my thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that your prowesse can me yield reliefe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, heare the story sad, which I shall tell you briefe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The forlorne Maiden, whom your eies have seene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The laughing stocke of fortunes mockeries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Am th’onely daughter of a King and Queene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose parents deare, whiles equal destinies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did ronne about, and their felicities</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The favourable heavens did not envy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did spred their rule through all the territories,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Phison and Euphrates floweth by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Gehons golden waves doe wash continually:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Till that their cruell cursed enemy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An huge great Dragon, horrible in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bred in the loathly lakes of Tartary,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With murdrous ravine, and devouring might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their kingdome spoild, and countrey wasted quight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Themselves, for feare into his jawes to fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He forst to castle strong to take their flight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where, fast embard in mighty brasen wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He has them now fowr years besiegd to make them thrall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Full many knights, adventurous and stout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have enterpriz’d that Monster to subdew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From every coast that heaven walks about</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have thither come the noble Martial crew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That famous harde atchievements still pursew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet never any could that girlond win,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all still shronke, and still he greater grew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All they, for want of faith, or guilt of sin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pitteous pray of his fiers cruelty have bin.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“At last, yled with far reported praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which flying fame throughout the world had spred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of doughty knights, whom Faery land did raise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That noble order hight of maidenhed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forthwith to court of Gloriane I sped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Gloriane, great Queene of glory bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose kingdomes seat Cleopolis is red;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There to obtaine some such redoubted knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Parents deare from tyrants powre deliver might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Yt was my chaunce (my chaunce was faire and good)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There for to find a fresh unproved knight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose manly hands imbrewd in guilty blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had never beene, ne ever by his might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had throwne to ground the unregarded right:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet of his prowesse proofe he since hath made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(I witnes am) in many a cruell fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The groning ghosts of many one dismaide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have felt the bitter dint of his avenging blade.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And ye, the forlorne reliques of his powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His biting sword, and his devouring speare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which have endured many a dreadfull-stowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can speake his prowesse that did earst you beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And well could rule; now he hath left you heare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be the record of his ruefull losse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of my dolefull disaventurous deare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O! heavie record of the good Red Crosse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where have yee left your lord that could so well you tosse?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Well hoped I, and faire beginnings had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he my captive languor should redeeme:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till, all unweeting, an Enchaunter bad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His sence abusd, and made him to misdeeme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My loyalty, not such as it did seeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That rather death desire then such despight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be judge, ye heavens, that all things right esteeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How I him lov’d, and love with all my might.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So thought I eke of him, and think I thought aright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thenceforth me desolate he quite forsooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wander where wilde fortune would me lead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And other bywaies he himselfe betooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where never foote of living wight did tread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That brought not backe the balefull body dead:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which him chaunced false Duessa meete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mine onely foe, mine onely deadly dread;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who with her witchcraft, and misseeming sweete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inveigled him to follow her desires unmeete.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“At last, by subtile sleights she him betraid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto his foe, a Gyaunt huge and tall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who him disarmed, dissolute, dismaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unwares surprised, and with mighty mall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The monster mercilesse him made to fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose fall did never foe before behold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now in darkesome dungeon, wretched thrall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Remedilesse for aie he doth him hold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is my cause of griefe, more great then may be told.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ere she had ended all she gan to faint:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he her comforted, and faire bespake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Certes, Madame, ye have great cause of plaint;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That stoutest heart, I weene, could cause to quake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But be of cheare, and comfort to you take;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For till I have acquitt your captive knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Assure your selfe I will you not forsake.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His chearefull words reviv’d her chearelesse spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So forth they went, the Dwarfe them guiding ever right.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-8" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Faire virgin to redeem her deare,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Brings Arthur to the fight:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who slays the Gyaunt, wounds the beast,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And strips Duessa quight</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Ay me! how many perils doe enfold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The righteous man, to make him daily fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were not that heavenly grace doth him uphold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stedfast truth acquite him out of all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her love is firme, her care continuall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So oft as he, through his own foolish pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or weaknes, is to sinfull bands made thrall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Els should this Redcrosse knight in bands have dyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For whose deliverance she this Prince doth thither guyd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They sadly traveild thus, untill they came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nigh to a castle builded strong and hye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then cryde the Dwarfe, “Lo! yonder is the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which my Lord, my liege, doth lucklesse ly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrall to that Gyaunts hatefull tyranny:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore, deare Sir, your mightie powres assay.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The noble knight alighted by and by</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From loftie steed, and badd the Ladie stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see what end of fight should him befall that day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So with his Squire, th’admirer of his might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He marched forth towardes that castle wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose gates he fownd fast shutt, ne living wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To warde the same, nor answere commers call.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then tooke that Squire an horne of bugle small,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which hong adowne his side in twisted gold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tasselles gay. Wyde wonders over all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that same hornes great virtues weren told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which had approved bene in uses manifold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Was never wight that heard that shrilling sownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But trembling feare did feel in every vaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Three miles it might be easy heard arownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Ecchoes three aunswer’d it selfe againe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No false enchauntment, nor deceiptfull traine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might once abide the terror of that blast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But presently was void and wholly vaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No gate so strong, no locke so firme and fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But with that percing noise flew open quite, or brast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The same before the Geaunts gate he blew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the castle quaked from the grownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every dore of freewill open flew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Gyaunt selfe, dismaied with that sownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where he with his Duessa dalliaunce fownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hast came rushing forth from inner bowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With staring countenance sterne, as one astownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And staggering steps, to weet what suddein stowre</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had wrought that horror strange, and dar’d his dreaded powre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And after him the proud Duessa came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">High mounted on her many headed beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every head with fyrie tongue did flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every head was crowned on his creast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bloody mouthed with late cruell feast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That when the knight beheld, his mightie shild</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his manly arme he soone addrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at him fiersly flew, with corage fild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eger greedinesse through every member thrild.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith the Gyant buckled him to fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Inflamd with scornefull wrath and high disdaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lifting up his dreadfull club on hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All armd with ragged snubbes and knottie graine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him thought at first encounter to have slaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wise and wary was that noble Pere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, lightly leaping from so monstrous maine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did fayre avoide the violence him nere:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It booted nought to thinke such thunderbolts to beare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne shame he thought to shonne so hideous might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The ydle stroke, enforcing furious way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Missing the marke of his misaymed sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did fall to ground, and with his heavy sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So deepely dinted in the driven clay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That three yardes deepe a furrow up did throw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sad earth, wounded with so sore assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did grone full grievous underneath the blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And trembling with strange feare did like an erthquake show.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when almightie Jove, in wrathfull mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wreake the guilt of mortall sins is bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hurles forth his thundring dart with deadly food</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enrold in flames, and smouldring dreriment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through riven cloudes and molten firmament;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fiers threeforked engin, making way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both loftie towres and highest trees hath rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all that might his angry passage stay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, shooting in the earth, castes up a mount of clay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His boystrous club, so buried in the grownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He could not rearen up againe so light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that the Knight him at advantage fownd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, whiles he strove his combred clubbe to quight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the earth, with blade all burning bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He smott off his left arme, which like a block</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did fall to ground, depriv’d of native might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Large streames of blood out of the truncked stock</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forth gushed, like fresh water streame from riven rocke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Dismayed with so desperate deadly wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke impatient of unwonted payne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He loudly brayd with beastly yelling sownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the fieldes rebellowed againe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As great a noyse, as when in Cymbrian plaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An heard of Bulles, whom kindly rage doth sting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe for the milky mothers want complaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fill the fieldes with troublous bellowing:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The neighbor woods arownd with hollow murmur ring.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That when his deare Duessa heard, and saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The evil stownd that daungerd her estate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto his aide she hastily did draw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her dreadfull beast; who, swolne with blood of late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came ramping forth with proud presumpteous gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And threatned all his heades like flaming brandes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But him the Squire made quickly to retrate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Encountring fiers with single sword in hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And twixt him and his Lord did like a bulwarke stand.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The proud Duessa, full of wrathfull spight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fiers disdaine to be affronted so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enforst her purple beast with all her might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That stop out of the way to overthroe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Scorning the let of so unequall foe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But nathemore would that corageous swayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To her yeeld passage gainst his Lord to goe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with outrageous strokes did him restraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with his body bard the way atwixt them twaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then tooke the angrie witch her golden cup,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which still she bore, replete with magick artes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Death and despeyre did many thereof sup,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And secret poyson through their inner partes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th’eternall bale of heavie wounded harts:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, after charmes and some enchauntments said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She lightly sprinkled on his weaker partes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith his sturdie corage soon was quayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all his sences were with suddein dread dismayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So downe he fell before the cruell beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who on his neck his bloody clawes did seize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That life nigh crusht out of his panting brest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No powre he had to stirre, nor will to rize.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That when the carefull knight gan well avise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He lightly left the foe with whom he fought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the beast gan turne his enterprise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For wondrous anguish in his hart it wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see his loved Squyre into such thraldom brought:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, high advauncing his blood-thirstie blade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stroke one of those deformed heades so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of his puissaunce proud ensample made:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His monstrous scalpe downe to his teeth it tore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that misformed shape misshaped more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A sea of blood gusht from the gaping wownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her gay garments staynd with filthy gore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And overflowed all the field arownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That over shoes in blood he waded on the grownd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereat he rored for exceeding paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to have heard great horror would have bred;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And scourging th’emptie ayre with his long trayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through great impatience of his grieved hed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His gorgeous ryder from her loftie sted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would have cast downe, and trodd in durty myre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had not the Gyaunt soone her succoured;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, all enrag’d with smart and frantick yre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came hurtling in full fiers, and forst the knight retyre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The force, which wont in two to be disperst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In one alone left hand he now unites,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which is through rage more strong then both were erst;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which his hideous club aloft he dites,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at his foe with furious rigor smites,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That strongest Oake might seeme to overthrow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The stroke upon his shield so heavie lites,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to the ground it doubleth him full low:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What mortall wight could ever beare so monstrous blow?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And in his fall his shield, that covered was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did loose his vele by chaunce, and open flew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The light whereof, that hevens light did pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such blazing brightnesse through the ayer threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That eye mote not the same endure to vew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when the Gyaunt spyde with staring eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He downe let fall his arme, and soft withdrew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His weapon huge, that heaved was on hye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For to have slain the man, that on the ground did lye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And eke the fruitfull-headed beast, amazd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At flashing beames of that sunshiny shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Became stark blind, and all his sences dazd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That downe he tumbled on the durtie field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seemd himselfe as conquered to yield.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when his maistresse proud perceiv’d to fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles yet his feeble feet for faintnesse reeld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the Gyaunt lowdly she gan call;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O! helpe, Orgoglio; helpe! or els we perish all.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At her so pitteous cry was much amoov’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her champion stout; and for to ayde his frend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Againe his wonted angry weapon proov’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all in vaine, for he has redd his end</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In that bright shield, and all their forces spend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them selves in vaine: for, since that glauncing sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He hath no powre to hurt, nor to defend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As where th’Almighties lightning brond does light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It dimmes the dazed eyen, and daunts the sences quight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when the Prince, to batteill new addrest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And threatning high his dreadfull stroke, did see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His sparkling blade about his head he blest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And smote off quite his right leg by the knee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That downe he tombled; as an aged tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">High growing on the top of rocky clift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose hartstrings with keene steele nigh hewen be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The mightie trunck, halfe rent with ragged rift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth roll adowne the rocks, and fall with fearefull drift.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Or as a Castle, reared high and round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By subtile engins and malitious slight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is undermined from the lowest ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her foundation forst, and feebled quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last downe falles; and with her heaped hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her hastie ruine does more heavie make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yields it selfe unto the victours might.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such was this Gyaunts fall, that seemd to shake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stedfast globe of earth, as it for feare did quake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The knight, then lightly leaping to the pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With mortall steele him smot againe so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That headlesse his unweldy bodie lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All wallowd in his owne fowle bloody gore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which flowed from his wounds in wondrous store.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, soone as breath out of his brest did pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That huge great body, which the Gyaunt bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was vanisht quite; and of that monstrous mas</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was nothing left, but like an emptie blader was.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whose grievous fall when false Duessa spyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her golden cup she cast unto the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And crowned mitre rudely threw asyde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such percing griefe her stubborne hart did wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she could not endure that dolefull stound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But leaving all behind her fled away:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The light-foot Squyre her quickly turnd around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, by hard meanes enforcing her to stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So brought unto his Lord as his deserved pray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The roiall Virgin which beheld from farre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In pensive plight and sad perplexitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whole atchievement of this doubtfull warre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came running fast to greet his victorie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sober gladnesse and myld modestie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with sweet joyous cheare him thus bespake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Fayre braunch of noblesse, flowre of chevalrie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with your worth the world amazed make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How shall I quite the paynes ye suffer for my sake?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And you, fresh budd of vertue springing fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom these sad eyes saw nigh unto deaths dore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What hath poore Virgin for such perill past</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith you to reward? Accept therefore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My simple selfe, and service evermore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he that high does sit, and all things see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With equall eye, their merites to restore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behold what ye this day have done for mee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what I cannot quite requite with usuree.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But sith the heavens, and your faire handeling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have made you master of the field this day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your fortune maister eke with governing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, well begonne, end all so well, I pray!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne let that wicked woman scape away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she it is, that did my Lord bethrall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My dearest Lord, and deepe in dongeon lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where he his better dayes hath wasted all:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O heare, how piteous he to you for ayd does call!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Forthwith he gave in charge unto his Squyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That scarlot whore to keepen carefully;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whyles he himselfe with greedie great desyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the Castle entred forcibly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where living creature none he did espye.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan he lowdly through the house to call;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But no man car’d to answere to his crye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There raignd a solemne silence over all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor voice was heard, nor wight was seene in bowre or hall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last, with creeping crooked pace forth came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An old old man, with beard as white as snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That on a staffe his feeble steps did frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And guyde his wearie gate both too and fro,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For his eye sight him fayled long ygo;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on his arme a bounch of keyes he bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which unused rust did overgrow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those were the keyes of every inner dore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he could not them use, but kept them still in store.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But very uncouth sight was to behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How he did fashion his untoward pace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For as he forward moovd his footing old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So backward still was turnd his wrincled face:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unlike to men, who ever, as they trace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both feet and face one way are wont to lead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This was the auncient keeper of that place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And foster father of the Gyaunt dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His name Ignaro did his nature right aread.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His reverend heares and holy gravitee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The knight much honord, as beseemed well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gently askt, where all the people bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which in that stately building wont to dwell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who answerd him full soft, <em>he could not tell</em>.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Again he askt, where that same knight was layd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom great Orgoglio with his puissaunce fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had made his caytive thrall: againe he sayde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><em>He could not tell</em>; ne ever other answere made.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then asked he, which way he in might pas?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><em>He could not tell</em>, againe he answered.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereat the courteous knight displeased was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said; “Old syre, it seemes thou hast not red</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How ill it sits with that same silver hed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In vaine to mocke, or mockt in vaine to bee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if thou be, as thou art pourtrahed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With natures pen, in ages grave degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aread in graver wise what I demaund of thee.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His answere likewise was, <em>he could not tell</em>:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose sencelesse speach, and doted ignorance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whenas the noble Prince had marked well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He ghest his nature by his countenance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And calmd his wrath with goodly temperance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, to him stepping, from his arme did reach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those keyes, and made himselfe free enterance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each dore he opened without any breach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was no barre to stop, nor foe him to empeach.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There all within full rich arayd he found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With royall arras, and resplendent gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did with store of every thing abound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That greatest Princes presence might behold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all the floore (too filthy to be told)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With blood of guiltlesse babes, and innocents trew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which there were slaine as sheepe out of the fold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Defiled was, that dreadfull was to vew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sacred ashes over it was strowed new.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And there beside of marble stone was built</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An Altare, carv’d with cunning ymagery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which trew Christians blood was often spilt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And holy Martyres often doen to dye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With cruell malice and strong tyranny:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose blessed sprites, from underneath the stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To God for vengeance cryde continually;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with great griefe were often heard to grone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That hardest heart would bleede to hear their piteous mone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Through every rowme he sought, and everie bowr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But no where could he find that wofull thrall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last he came unto an yron doore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That fast was lockt, but key found not at all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emongst that bounch to open it withall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in the same a little grate was pight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through which he sent his voyce, and lowd did call</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all his powre, to weet if living wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were housed therewithin, whom he enlargen might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith an hollow, dreary, murmuring voyce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These pitteous plaintes and dolours did resound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“O! who is that, which bringes me happy choyce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of death, that here lye dying every stound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet live perforce in balefull darkenesse bound?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For now three Moones have changed thrice their hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And have been thrice hid underneath the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since I the heavens chearefull face did vew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O! welcome thou, that doest of death bring tydings trew.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when that Champion heard, with percing point</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of pitty deare his heart was thrilled sore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And trembling horrour ran through every joynt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ruth of gentle knight so fowle forlore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which shaking off, he rent that yron dore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With furious force and indignation fell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where entred in, his foot could find no flore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all a deepe descent, as darke as hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That breathed ever forth a filthie banefull smell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But nether darkenesse fowle, nor filthy bands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor noyous smell, his purpose could withhold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Entire affection hateth nicer hands)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that with constant zele and corage bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After long paines and labors manifold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He found the meanes that Prisoner up to reare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose feeble thighes, unable to uphold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His pined corse, him scarse to light could beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A ruefull spectacle of death and ghastly drere.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His sad dull eies, deepe sunck in hollow pits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could not endure th’unwonted sunne to view;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His bare thin cheekes for want of better bits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And empty sides deceived of their dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could make a stony hart his hap to rew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His rawbone armes, whose mighty brawned bowrs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were wont to rive steele plates, and helmets hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were clene consum’d; and all his vitall powres</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Decayd, and al his flesh shronk up like withered flowres.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whome when his Lady saw, to him she ran</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hasty joy: to see him made her glad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sad to view his visage pale and wan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who earst in flowres of freshest youth was clad.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, when her well of teares she wasted had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She said; “Ah dearest Lord! what evill starre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On you hath frownd, and pourd his influence bad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of your selfe ye thus berobbed arre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this misseeming hew your manly looks doth marre?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But welcome now, my Lord in wele or woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose presence I have lackt too long a day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fie on Fortune, mine avowed foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose wrathful wreakes them selves doe now alay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for these wronges shall treble penaunce pay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of treble good: good growes of evils priefe.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The chearelesse man, whom sorrow did dismay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had no delight to treaten of his griefe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His long endured famine needed more reliefe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Faire Lady,” then said that victorious knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“The things, that grievous were to doe, or beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them to renew, I wote, breeds no delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Best musicke breeds delight in loathing eare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But th’only good that growes of passed feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is to be wise, and ware of like agein.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This daies ensample hath this lesson deare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deepe written in my heart with yron pen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That blisse may not abide in state of mortall men.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Henceforth, Sir knight, take to you wonted strength,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And maister these mishaps with patient might.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Loe! where your foe lies strecht in monstrous length;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And loe! that wicked woman in your sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The roote of all your care and wretched plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now in your powre, to let her live, or die.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“To doe her die,” (quoth Una) “were despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shame t’avenge so weake an enimy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But spoile her of her scarlot robe, and let her fly.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So, as she bad, that witch they disaraid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And robd of roiall robes, and purple pall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ornaments that richly were displaid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne spared they to strip her naked all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, when they had despoyld her tire and call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as she was their eies might her behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her misshaped parts did them appall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A loathly, wrinckled hag, ill favoured, old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose secret filth good manners biddeth not be told.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her crafty head was altogether bald,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, as in hate of honorable eld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was overgrowne with scurfe and filthy scald;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her teeth out of her rotten gummes were feld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her sowre breath abhominably smeld;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her dried dugs, lyke bladders lacking wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hong downe, and filthy matter from them weld;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her wrizled skin, as rough as maple rind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So scabby was that would have loathd all womankind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her neather parts, the shame of all her kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My chaster Muse for shame doth blush to write;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But at her rompe she growing had behind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A foxes taile, with dong all fowly dight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke her feete most monstrous were in sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For one of them was like an Eagles claw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With griping talaunts armd to greedy fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other like a beares uneven paw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More ugly shape yet never living creature saw.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when the knights beheld amazd they were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wondred at so fowle deformed wight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Such then,” (said Una,) “as she seemeth here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such is the face of falshood: such the sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of fowle Duessa, when her borrowed light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is laid away, and counterfesaunce knowne.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus when they had the witch disrobed quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all her filthy feature open showne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They let her goe at will, and wander waies unknowne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Shee, flying fast from heavens hated face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from the world that her discovered wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fled to the wastfull wildernesse apace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From living eies her open shame to hide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lurkt in rocks and caves, long unespide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that faire crew of knights, and Una faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did in that castle afterwards abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To rest them selves, and weary powres repaire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where store they fownd of al that dainty was and rare.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-9" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>His loves and linage Arthur tells:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The Knights knitt friendly hands:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sir Trevisan flies from Despeyre,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Whom Redcrosse Knight withstands.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>O goodly golden chayne, wherewith yfere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The vertues linked are in lovely wize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And noble mindes of yore allyed were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In brave poursuitt of chevalrous emprize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none did others safety despize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor aid envy to him in need that stands;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But friendly each did others praise devize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How to advaunce with favourable hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As this good Prince redeemd the Redcrosse knight from bands.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who when their powres, empayrd through labor long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With dew repast they had recured well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that weake captive wight now wexed strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them list no lenger there at leasure dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But forward fare as their adventures fell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, ere they parted, Una faire besought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That straunger knight his name and nation tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least so great good, as he for her had wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should die unknown, and buried be in thankles thought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Faire virgin,” (said the Prince,) “yee me require</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A thing without the compas of my witt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For both the lignage, and the certein Sire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From which I sprong, from mee are hidden yitt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all so soone as life did me admitt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into this world, and shewed hevens light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From mothers pap I taken was unfitt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And streight deliver’d to a Fary knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be upbrought in gentle thewes and martiall might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Unto Old Timon he me brought bylive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Old Timon, who in youthly yeares hath beene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In warlike feates th’expertest man alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And is the wisest now on earth I weene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His dwelling is low in a valley greene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under the foot of Rauran mossy hore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whence the river Dee, as silver cleene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His tombling billowes rolls with gentle rore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There all my daies he traind mee up in vertuous lore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thither the great magicien Merlin came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As was his use, ofttimes to visitt mee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he had charge my discipline to frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Tutors nouriture to oversee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him oft and oft I askt in privity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of what loines and what lignage I did spring;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose aunswere bad me still assured bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I was sonne and heire unto a king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As time in her just term the truth to light should bring.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Well worthy impe,” said then the Lady gent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“And Pupill fitt for such a Tutors hand!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But what adventure, or what high intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath brought you hither into Faery land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Aread, Prince Arthure, crowne of Martiall band?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Full hard it is,” (quoth he) “to read aright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The course of heavenly cause, or understand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The secret meaning of th’eternall might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That rules mens waies, and rules the thoughts of living wight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“For whether he, through fatal deepe foresight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me hither sent for cause to me unghest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that fresh bleeding wound, which day and night</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilome doth rancle in my riven brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With forced fury following his behest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me hither brought by wayes yet never found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You to have helpt I hold my selfe yet blest.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Ah! courteous Knight,” (quoth she) “what secret wound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could ever find to grieve the gentlest hart on ground?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Dear Dame,” (quoth he) “you sleeping sparkes awake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, troubled once, into huge flames will grow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever will their fervent fury slake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till living moysture into smoke do flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wasted life doe lye in ashes low:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet sithens silence lesseneth not my fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, told, it flames; and, hidden, it does glow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I will revele what ye so much desire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, Love! lay down thy bow, the whiles I may respyre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“It was in freshest flowre of youthly yeares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When corage first does creepe in manly chest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then first the cole of kindly heat appeares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To kindle love in every living brest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But me had warnd old Timons wise behest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those creeping flames by reason to subdew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before their rage grew to so great unrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As miserable lovers use to rew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which still wex old in woe, whiles wo stil wexeth new.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“That ydle name of love, and lovers life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As losse of time, and vertues enimy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I ever scornd, and joyd to stirre up strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In middest of their mournfull Tragedy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ay wont to laugh when them I heard to cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And blow the fire which them to ashes brent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their God himselfe, grievd at my libertie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shott many a dart at me with fiers intent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I them warded all with wary government.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But all in vaine: no fort can be so strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne fleshly brest can armed be so sownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But will at last be wonne with battrie long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or unawares at disavantage fownd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nothing is sure that growes on earthly grownd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And who most trustes in arme of fleshly might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And boastes in beauties chaine not to be bownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth soonest fall in disaventrous fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yeeldes his caytive neck to victours most despight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ensample make of him your haplesse joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of my selfe now mated, as ye see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose prouder vaunt that proud avenging boy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did soone pluck downe, and curbd my libertee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For on a day, prickt forth with jollitee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of looser life and heat of hardiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Raunging the forest wide on courser free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fields, the floods, the heavens, with one consent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did seeme to laugh on me, and favour mine intent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Forwearied with my sportes, I did alight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From loftie steed, and downe to sleepe me layd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The verdant gras my couch did goodly dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pillow was my helmett fayre displayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles every sence the humour sweet embayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And slombring soft my hart did steale away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me seemed, by my side a royall Mayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her daintie limbes full softly down did lay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So fayre a creature yet saw never sunny day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Most goodly glee and lovely blandishment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She to me made, and badd me love her deare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For dearely sure her love was to me bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As, when just time expired, should appeare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But whether dreames delude, or true it were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was never hart so ravisht with delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne living man like wordes did ever heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As she to me delivered all that night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at her parting said, She Queene of Faeries hight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“When I awoke, and found her place devoyd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And nought but pressed gras where she had lyen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I sorrowed all so much as earst I joyd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And washed all her place with watry eyen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From that day forth I lov’d that face divyne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From that day forth I cast in carefull mynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seek her out with labor and long tyne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And never vowd to rest till her I fynd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nyne monethes I seek in vain, yet ni’ll that vow unbynd.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus as he spake, his visage wexed pale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chaunge of hew great passion did bewray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yett still he strove to cloke his inward bale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hide the smoke that did his fire display,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till gentle Una thus to him gan say:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“O happy Queene of Faeries! that hast fownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst many, one that with his prowesse may</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Defend thine honour, and thy foes confownd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>True loves are often sown, but seldom grow on grownd.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thine, O! then,” said the gentle Redcrosse knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Next to that Ladies love, shalbe the place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O fayrest virgin! full of heavenly light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose wondrous faith, exceeding earthly race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was firmest fixt in myne extremest case.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And you, my Lord, the Patrone of my life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that great Queene may well gaine worthie grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For onely worthie you through prowes priefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yf living man mote worthie be to be her liefe.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So diversly discoursing of their loves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The golden Sunne his glistring head gan shew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sad remembraunce now the Prince amoves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With fresh desire his voyage to pursew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Als Una earnd her traveill to renew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then those two knights, fast friendship for to bynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And love establish each to other trew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gave goodly gifts, the signes of gratefull mynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke, as pledges firme, right hands together joynd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Prince Arthur gave a boxe of Diamond sure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Embowd with gold and gorgeous ornament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein were closd few drops of liquor pure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of wondrous worth, and vertue excellent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That any wownd could heale incontinent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to requite, the Redcrosse knight him gave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A booke, wherein his Saveours testament</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was writt with golden letters rich and brave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A worke of wondrous grace, and hable soules to save.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus beene they parted; Arthur on his way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke his love, and th’other for to fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Unaes foe, that all her realme did pray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she, now weighing the decayed plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shrunken synewes of her chosen knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would not a while her forward course pursew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne bring him forth in face of dreadfull fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till he recovered had his former hew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For him to be yet weake and wearie well she knew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So as they traveild, lo! they gan espy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An armed knight towards them gallop fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemed from some feared foe to fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or other griesly thing that him aghast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still as he fledd his eye was backward cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if his feare still followed him behynd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Als flew his steed as he his bandes had brast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his winged heeles did tread the wynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he had beene a fole of Pegasus his kynd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nigh as he drew, they might perceive his head</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bee unarmd, and curld uncombed heares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upstaring stiffe, dismaid with uncouth dread:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor drop of blood in all his face appeares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor life in limbe; and, to increase his feares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In fowle reproch of knighthoodes fayre degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About his neck an hempen rope he weares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with his glistring armes does ill agree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he of rope or armes has now no memoree.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Redcrosse knight toward him crossed fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet what mister wight was so dismayd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There him he findes all sencelesse and aghast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of him selfe he seemd to be afrayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom hardly he from flying forward stayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till he these wordes to him deliver might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Sir knight, aread who hath ye thus arayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke from whom make ye this hasty flight?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For never knight I saw in such misseeming plight.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He answerd nought at all; but adding new</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Feare to his first amazment, staring wyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With stony eyes and hartlesse hollow hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Astonisht stood, as one that had aspyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Infernall furies with their chaines untyde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him yett againe, and yett againe, bespake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gentle knight; who nought to him replyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, trembling every joynt, did inly quake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And foltring tongue, at last, these words seemd forth to shake;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“For Gods deare love, Sir knight, doe me not stay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For loe! he comes, he comes fast after mee.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eft looking back would faine have runne away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he him forst to stay, and tellen free</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The secrete cause of his perplexitie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet nathemore by his bold hartie speach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could his blood frosen hart emboldened bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But through his boldnes rather feare did reach;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yett, forst, at last he made through silence suddein breach.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And am I now in safetie sure,” (quoth he)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“From him that would have forced me to dye?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And is the point of death now turnd fro mee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I may tell this haplesse history?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Fear nought,” (quoth he) “no daunger now is nye.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Then shall I you recount a ruefull cace,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Said he) “the which with this unlucky eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I late beheld; and, had not greater grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me reft from it, had bene partaker of the place.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“I lately chaunst (Would I had never chaunst!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a fayre knight to keepen companee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir Terwin hight, that well himselfe advaunst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In all affayres, and was both bold and free;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But not so happy as mote happy bee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He lov’d, as was his lot, a Lady gent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That him againe lov’d in the least degree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she was proud, and of too high intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And joyd to see her lover languish and lament:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“From whom retourning sad and comfortlesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As on the way together we did fare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We met that villen, (God from him me blesse!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That cursed wight, from whom I scapt whyleare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A man of hell that calls himselfe Despayre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who first us greets, and after fayre areedes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of tydinges straunge, and of adventures rare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So creeping close, as Snake in hidden weedes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inquireth of our states, and of our knightly deedes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Which when he knew, and felt our feeble harts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Embost with bale, and bitter byting griefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which love had launched with his deadly darts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With wounding words, and termes of foule repriefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He pluckt from us all hope of dew reliefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That earst us held in love of lingring life;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then hopelesse, hartlesse, gan the cunning thiefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perswade us dye, to stint all further strife:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To me he lent this rope, to him a rusty knife.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“With which sad instrument of hasty death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That wofull lover, loathing lenger light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A wyde way made to let forth living breath:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But I, more fearefull or more lucky wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dismayd with that deformed dismall sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fledd fast away, halfe dead with dying feare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne yet assur’d of life by you, Sir knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose like infirmity like chaunce may beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But God you never let his charmed speaches heare!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“How may a man,” (said he) “with idle speach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be wonne to spoyle the Castle of his health?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“I wote,” (quoth he) “whom tryall late did teach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That like would not for all this worldes wealth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His subtile tong like dropping honny mealt’h</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the heart, and searcheth every vaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, ere one be aware, by secret stealth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His powre is reft, and weaknes doth remaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O! never, Sir, desire to try his guilefull traine.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Certes,” (sayd he) “hence shall I never rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till I that treachours art have heard and tryde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And you, Sir knight, whose name mote I request,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of grace do me unto his cabin guyde.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“I, that hight Trevisan,” (quoth he) “will ryde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against my liking backe to doe you grace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But nor for gold nor glee will I abyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By you, when ye arrive in that same place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For lever had I die then see his deadly face.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ere long they come where that same wicked wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His dwelling has, low in an hollow cave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far underneath a craggy cliff ypight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Darke, dolefull, dreary, like a greedy grave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That still for carrion carcases doth crave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On top whereof ay dwelt the ghastly Owle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shrieking his balefull note, which ever drave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far from that haunt all other chearefull fowle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all about it wandring ghostes did wayle and howle.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And all about old stockes and stubs of trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereon nor fruit nor leafe was ever seene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did hang upon the ragged rocky knees;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which had many wretches hanged beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose carcases were scattred on the greene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And throwne about the cliffs. Arrived there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That bare-head knight, for dread and dolefull teene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would faine have fled, ne durst approchen neare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But th’other forst him staye, and comforted in feare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That darkesome cave they enter, where they find</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That cursed man, low sitting on the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Musing full sadly in his sullein mind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His griesie lockes, long growen and unbound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disordred hong about his shoulders round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hid his face; through which his hollow eyne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lookt deadly dull, and stared as astound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His rawbone cheekes, through penurie and pine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were shronke into his jawes, as he did never dyne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His garment, nought but many ragged clouts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With thornes together pind and patched was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which his naked sides he wrapt abouts;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him beside there lay upon the gras</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A dreary corse, whose life away did pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All wallowd in his own yet lukewarme blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from his wound yet welled fresh, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which a rusty knife fast fixed stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made an open passage for the gushing flood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which piteous spectacle, approving trew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wofull tale that Trevisan had told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whenas the gentle Redcrosse knight did vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With firie zeale he burnt in courage bold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him to avenge before his blood were cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the villein sayd; “Thou damned wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The authour of this fact we here behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What justice can but judge against thee right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With thine owne blood to price his blood, here shed in sight?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“What franticke fit,” (quoth he) “hath thus distraught</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thee, foolish man, so rash a doome to give?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What justice ever other judgement taught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he should dye who merites not to live?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">None els to death this man despayring drive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But his owne guiltie mind, deserving death.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is then unjust to each his dew to give?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or let him dye, that loatheth living breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or let him die at ease, that liveth here uneath?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Who travailes by the wearie wandring way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To come unto his wished home in haste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And meetes a flood that doth his passage stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is not great grace to helpe him over past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or free his feet that in the myre sticke fast?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most envious man, that grieves at neighbours good;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fond, that joyest in the woe thou hast!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why wilt not let him passe, that long hath stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the bancke, yet wilt thy selfe not pas the flood?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“He there does now enjoy eternall rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And happy ease, which thou doest want and crave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And further from it daily wanderest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What if some little payne the passage have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That makes frayle flesh to feare the bitter wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is not short payne well borne, that bringes long ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And layes the soule to sleepe in quiet grave?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sleepe after toyle, port after stormie seas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ease after warre, death after life, does greatly please.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The knight much wondred at his suddeine wit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sayd; “The terme of life is limited,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne may a man prolong, nor shorten, it:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The souldier may not move from watchfull sted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor leave his stand untill his Captaine bed.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Who life did limit by almightie doome,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Quoth he) “knowes best the termes established;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he, that points the Centonell his roome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth license him depart at sound of morning droome.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Is not his deed, what ever thing is donne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In heaven and earth? Did not he all create</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To die againe? All ends that was begonne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their times in his eternall booke of fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are written sure, and have their certein date.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who then can strive with strong necessitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That holds the world in its still chaunging state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or shunne the death ordaynd by destinie?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When houre of death is come, let none aske whence, nor why.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The lenger life, I wote, the greater sin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The greater sin, the greater punishment:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All those great battels, which thou boasts to win</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through strife, and bloodshed, and avengement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now praysd, hereafter deare thou shalt repent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For life must life, and blood must blood, repay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is not enough thy evill life forespent?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he that once hath missed the right way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The further he doth goe, the further he doth stray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Then doe no further goe, no further stray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But here ly downe, and to thy rest betake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th’ill to prevent, that life ensewen may;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For what hath life that may it loved make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gives not rather cause it to forsake?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Feare, sicknesse, age, losse, labour, sorrow, strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Payne, hunger, cold that makes the hart to quake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever fickle fortune rageth rife;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All which, and thousands mo, do make a loathsome life.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thou, wretched man, of death hast greatest need,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If in true ballaunce thou wilt weigh thy state;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For never knight, that dared warlike deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More luckless dissaventures did amate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Witnes the dungeon deepe, wherein of late</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy life shutt up for death so oft did call;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And though good lucke prolonged hath thy date,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet death then would the like mishaps forestall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the which hereafter thou maist happen fall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Why then doest thou, O man of sin! desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To draw thy dayes forth to their last degree?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is not the measure of thy sinfull hire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">High heaped up with huge iniquitee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the day of wrath to burden thee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is not enough, that to this Lady mild</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou falsed hast thy faith with perjuree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sold thy selfe to serve Duessa vild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With whom in al abuse thou hast thy selfe defild?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Is not he just, that all this doth behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From highest heven, and beares an equall eie?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall he thy sins up in his knowledge fold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And guilty be of thine impietie?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is not his lawe, Let every sinner die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Die shall all flesh? What then must needs be donne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is it not better to doe willinglie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then linger till the glas be all out ronne?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death is the end of woes: die soone, O faeries sonne!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The knight was much enmoved with his speach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That as a swords poynt through his hart did perse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his conscience made a secrete breach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well knowing trew all that he did reherse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to his fresh remembraunce did reverse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The ugly vew of his deformed crimes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all his manly powres it did disperse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he were charmed with inchaunted rimes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That oftentimes he quakt, and fainted oftentimes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In which amazement when the Miscreaunt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perceived him to waver, weake and fraile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles trembling horror did his conscience daunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hellish anguish did his soule assaile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To drive him to despaire, and quite to quaile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hee shewd him, painted in a table plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The damned ghosts that doe in torments waile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thousand feends that doe them endlesse paine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With fire and brimstone, which for ever shall remaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The sight whereof so throughly him dismaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nought but death before his eies he saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever burning wrath before him laid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By righteous sentence of th’Almighties law.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan the villein him to overcraw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And brought unto him swords, ropes, poison, fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all that might him to perdition draw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bad him choose what death he would desire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For death was due to him that had provokt Gods ire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, whenas none of them he saw him take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He to him raught a dagger sharpe and keene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gave it him in hand: his hand did quake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tremble like a leafe of Aspin greene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And troubled blood through his pale face was seene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To come and goe with tidings from the heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As it a ronning messenger had beene.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last, resolv’d to work his finall smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He lifted up his hand, that backe againe did start.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which whenas Una saw, through every vaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The crudled cold ran to her well of life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As in a swowne: but, soone reliv’d againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of his hand she snatcht the cursed knife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And threw it to the ground, enraged rife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to him said; “Fie, fie, faint hearted Knight!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What meanest thou by this reprochfull strife?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is this the battaile which thou vauntst to fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With that fire-mouthed Dragon, horrible and bright?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Come; come away, fraile, feeble, fleshly wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne let vaine words bewitch thy manly hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne divelish thoughts dismay thy constant spright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In heavenly mercies hast thou not a part?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why shouldst thou then despeire, that chosen art?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where justice growes, there grows eke greater grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which doth quench the brond of hellish smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that accurst hand-writing doth deface.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arise, sir Knight; arise, and leave this cursed place.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So up he rose, and thence amounted streight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when the carle beheld, and saw his guest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would safe depart, for all his subtile sleight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He chose an halter from among the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with it hong him selfe, unbid, unblest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But death he could not worke himselfe thereby;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thousand times he so him selfe had drest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet nathelesse it could not doe him die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till he should die his last, that is, eternally.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-10" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Her faithfull knight faire Una brings</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To house of Holinesse;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whre he is taught repentance, and</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The way to hevenly blesse.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>What man is he, that boasts of fleshly might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And vaine assuraunce of mortality,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, all so soone as it doth come to fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against spirituall foes, yields by and by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or from the fielde most cowardly doth fly!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne let the man ascribe it to his skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That thorough grace hath gained victory:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If any strength we have, it is to ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all the good is Gods, both power and eke will.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By that which lately hapned Una saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That this her knight was feeble, and too faint;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all his sinewes woxen weake and raw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through long enprisonment, and hard constraint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he endured in his late restraint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That yet he was unfitt for bloody fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore, to cherish him with diets daint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She cast to bring him where he chearen might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till he recovered had his late decayed plight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There was an auncient house nor far away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Renowmd throughout the world for sacred lore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pure unspotted life: so well, they say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It governd was, and guided evermore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through wisedome of a matrone grave and hore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose onely joy was to relieve the needes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of wretched soules, and helpe the helpelesse pore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All night she spent in bidding of her bedes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the day in doing good and godly deedes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Dame Cælia men did her call, as thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From heaven to come, or thither to arise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The mother of three daughters, well upbrought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In goodly thewes, and godly exercise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The eldest two, most sober, chast, and wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fidelia and Speranza, virgins were;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though spousd, yet wanting wedlocks solemnize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But faire Charissa to a lovely fere</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was lincked, and by him had many pledges dere.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Arrived there, the dore they find fast lockt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For it was warely watched night and day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For feare of many foes; but, when they knockt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Porter opened unto them streight way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He was an aged syre, all hory gray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With lookes full lowly cast, and gate full slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wont on a staffe his feeble steps to stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hight Humiltá. They passe in, stouping low;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For streight and narrow was the way which he did show.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Each goodly thing is hardest to begin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, entred in, a spatious court they see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both plaine and pleasaunt to be walked in;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where them does meete a francklin faire and free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And entertaines with comely courteous glee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His name was Zele, that him right well became:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For in his speaches and behaveour hee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did labour lively to expresse the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gladly did them guide, till to the Hall they came.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There fayrely them receives a gentle Squyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of myld demeanure and rare courtesee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right cleanly clad in comely sad attyre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In word and deede that shewd great modestee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And knew his good to all of each degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hight Reverence. He them with speaches meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Does faire entreat; no courting nicetee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But simple, trew, and eke unfained sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As might become a Squyre so great persons to greet.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And afterwardes them to his Dame he leades,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That aged Dame, the Lady of the place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who all this while was busy at her beades;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which doen, she up arose with seemely grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And toward them full matronely did pace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where, when that fairest Una she beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom well she knew to spring from hevenly race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her heart with joy unwonted inly sweld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As feeling wondrous comfort in her weaker eld:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, her embracing, said; “O happy earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereon thy innocent feet doe ever tread!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most vertuous virgin, borne of hevenly berth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, to redeeme thy woefull parents head</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From tyrans rage and ever-dying dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hast wandred through the world now long a day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yett ceassest not thy weary soles to lead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What grace hath thee now hither brought this way?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or doen thy feeble feet unweeting hither stray?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Straunge thing it is an errant knight to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here in this place; or any other wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hither turnes his steps. So few there bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That chose the narrow path, or seeke the right:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All keepe the broad high way, and take delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With many rather for to goe astray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And be partakers of their evill plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then with a few to walke the rightest way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O foolish men! why hast ye to your own decay?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thy selfe to see, and tyred limbes to rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O matrone sage,” (quoth she) “I hither came;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And this good knight his way with me addrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ledd with thy prayses, and broad-blazed fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That up to heven is blowne.” The auncient Dame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him goodly greeted in her modest guyse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And enterteynd them both, as best became,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all the court’sies that she could devyse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne wanted ought to shew her bounteous or wise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus as they gan of sondrie things devise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Loe! two most goodly virgins came in place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ylinked arme in arme in lovely wise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With countenance demure, and modest grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They numbred even steps and equall pace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which the eldest, that Fidelia hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like sunny beames threw from her Christall face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That could have dazd the rash beholders sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And round about her head did shine like hevens light.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She was araied all in lilly white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in her right hand bore a cup of gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With wine and water fild up to the hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which a Serpent did himselfe enfold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That horrour made to all that did behold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she no whitt did chaunge her constant mood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in her other hand she fast did hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A booke, that was both signd and seald with blood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein darke things were writt, hard to be understood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her younger sister, that Speranza hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was clad in blew, that her beseemed well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not all so chearefull seemed she of sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As was her sister: whether dread did dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or anguish in her hart, is hard to tell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon her arme a silver anchor lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereon she leaned ever, as befell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever up to heven, as she did pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her stedfast eyes were bent, ne swarved other way.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They, seeing Una, towardes her gan wend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who them encounters with like courtesee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Many kind speeches they betweene them spend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And greatly joy each other for to see:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then to the knight with shamefast modestie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They turne themselves, at Unaes meeke request,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him salute with well beseeming glee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who faire them quites, as him beseemed best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And goodly gan discourse of many a noble gest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then Una thus: “But she, your sister deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The deare Charissa, where is she become?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or wants she health, or busie is elswhere?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Ah! no,” said they, “but forth she may not come;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she of late is lightned of her wombe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hath encreast the world with one sonne more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her to see should be but troublesome.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Indeed,” (quoth she) “that should her trouble sore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thankt be God, and her encrease so evermore!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then said the aged Cælia, “Deare dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And you, good Sir, I wote that of your toyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And labors long, through which ye hither came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye both forwearied be: therefore, a whyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I read you rest, and to your bowres recoyle.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then called she a Groome, that forth him ledd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into a goodly lodge, and gan despoile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of puissant armes, and laid in easie bedd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His name was meeke Obedience, rightfully aredd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now when their wearie limbes with kindly rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bodies were refresht with dew repast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayre Una gan Fidelia fayre request,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To have her knight into her schoolehous plaste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of her heavenly learning he might taste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heare the wisedom of her wordes divine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She graunted; and that knight so much agraste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she him taught celestiall discipline,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And opened his dull eyes, that light mote in them shine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And that her sacred Booke, with blood ywritt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none could reade except she did them teach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She unto him disclosed every whitt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heavenly documents thereout did preach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That weaker witt of man could never reach;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of God; of grace; of justice; of freewill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That wonder was to heare her goodly speach;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she was hable with her wordes to kill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rayse againe to life the hart that she did thrill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, when she list poure out her larger spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She would commaund the hasty Sunne to stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or backward turne his course from hevens hight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes great hostes of men she could dismay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dry-shod to passe she parts the flouds in tway;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke huge mountaines from their native seat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She would commaund themselves to beare away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And throw in raging sea with roaring threat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Almightie God her gave such powre and puissaunce great.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The faithfull knight now grew in little space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By hearing her, and by her sisters lore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To such perfection of all hevenly grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That wretched world he gan for to abhore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mortall life gan loath as thing forlore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Greevd with remembrance of his wicked wayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And prickt with anguish of his sinnes so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he desirde to end his wretched dayes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So much the dart of sinfull guilt the soule dismayes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But wise Speranza gave him comfort sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And taught him how to take assured hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon her silver anchor, as was meet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Els had his sinnes, so great and manifold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made him forget all that Fidelia told.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In this distressed doubtfull agony,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When him his dearest Una did behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disdeining life, desiring leave to dye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She found her selfe assayld with great perplexity;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And came to Cælia to declare her smart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, well acquainted with that commune plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which sinfull horror workes in wounded hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her wisely comforted all that she might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With goodly counsell and advisement right;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And streightway sent with carefull diligence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To fetch a Leach, the which had great insight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In that disease of grieved conscience,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And well could cure the same: His name was Patience.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who, comming to that sowle-diseased knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could hardly him intreat to tell his grief:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which knowne, and all that noyd his heavie spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well searcht, eftsoones he gan apply relief</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of salves and med’cines, which had passing prief;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thereto added wordes of wondrous might.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which to ease he him recured brief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And much aswag’d the passion of his plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he his paine endur’d, as seeming now more light.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But yet the cause and root of all his ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Inward corruption and infected sin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not purg’d nor heald, behind remained still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And festring sore did ranckle yett within,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Close creeping twixt the marow and the skin:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to extirpe, he laid him privily</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Downe in a darksome lowly place far in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereas he meant his corrosives to apply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with streight diet tame his stubborne malady.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In ashes and sackcloth he did array</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His daintie corse, proud humors to abate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dieted with fasting every day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The swelling of his woundes to mitigate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made him pray both earely and eke late:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever, as superfluous flesh did rott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amendment readie still at hand did wayt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To pluck it out with pincers fyrie whott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That soone in him was lefte no one corrupted jott.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And bitter Penaunce, with an yron whip,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was wont him once to disple every day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sharp Remorse his hart did prick and nip,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That drops of blood thence like a well did play:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sad Repentance used to embay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His blamefull body in salt water sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The filthy blottes of sin to wash away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So in short space they did to health restore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The man that would not live, but erst lay at deathes dore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In which his torment often was so great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That like a Lyon he would cry and rore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rend his flesh, and his owne synewes eat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His owne deare Una, hearing evermore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His ruefull shriekes and gronings, often tore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her guiltlesse garments and her golden heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For pitty of his payne and anguish sore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet all with patience wisely she did beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For well she wist his cryme could els be never cleare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom, thus recover’d by wise Patience</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And trew Repentaunce, they to Una brought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, joyous of his cured conscience,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him dearely kist, and fayrely eke besought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himselfe to chearish, and consuming thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To put away out of his carefull brest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By this Charissa, late in child-bed brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was woxen strong, and left her fruitfull nest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To her fayre Una brought this unacquainted guest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She was a woman in her freshest age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of wondrous beauty, and of bounty rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With goodly grace and comely personage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was on earth not easie to compare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of great love, but Cupids wanton snare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As hell she hated; chaste in worke and will:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her necke and brests were ever open bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ay thereof her babes might sucke their fill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rest was all in yellow robes arayed still.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A multitude of babes about her hong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Playing their sportes, that joyd her to behold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom still she fed whiles they were weake and young,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But thrust them forth still as they wexed old:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on her head she wore a tyre of gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adornd with gemmes and owches wondrous fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose passing price uneath was to be told:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by her syde there sate a gentle payre</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of turtle doves, she sitting in an yvory chayre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The knight and Una entring fayre her greet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bid her joy of that her happy brood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who them requites with court’sies seeming meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And entertaynes with friendly chearefull mood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Una her besought, to be so good</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As in her vertuous rules to schoole her knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now after all his torment well withstood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In that sad house of Penaunce, where his spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had past the paines of hell and long-enduring night.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She was right joyous of her just request;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And taking by the hand that Faeries sonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan him instruct in everie good behest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of love, and righteousnes, and well to donne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wrath and hatred warely to shonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That drew on men Gods hatred and his wrath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many soules in dolours had fordonne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which when him she well instructed hath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From thence to heaven she teacheth him the ready path.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Wherein his weaker wandring steps to guyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An auncient matrone she to her does call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose sober lookes her wisedome well descryde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her name was Mercy; well knowne over-all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be both gratious and eke liberall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom the carefull charge of him she gave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To leade aright, that he should never fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In all his waies through this wide worldes wave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Mercy in the end his righteous soule might save.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The godly Matrone by the hand him beares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth from her presence, by a narrow way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Scattred with bushy thornes and ragged breares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which still before him she remov’d away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nothing might his ready passage stay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever, when his feet encombred were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or gan to shrinke, or from the right to stray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She held him fast, and firmely did upbeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As carefull Nourse her child from falling oft does reare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones unto an holy Hospitall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was foreby the way, she did him bring;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which seven Bead-men, that had vowed all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their life to service of high heavens King,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did spend their daies in doing godly thing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their gates to all were open evermore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That by the wearie way were traveiling;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And one sate wayting ever them before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To call in commers-by that needy were and pore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The first of them, that eldest was and best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the house had charge and governement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Guardian and Steward of the rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His office was to give entertainement</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lodging unto all that came and went;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not unto such as could him feast againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And double quite for that he on them spent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But such as want of harbour did constraine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those for Gods sake his dewty was to entertaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The second was as Almner of the place:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His office was the hungry for to feed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thristy give to drinke; a worke of grace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He feard not once himselfe to be in need,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne car’d to hoord for those whom he did breede:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The grace of God he layd up still in store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which as a stocke he left unto his seede.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He had enough; what need him care for more?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And had he lesse, yet some he would give to the pore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The third had of their wardrobe custody,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which were not rich tyres, nor garments gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The plumes of pride, and winges of vanity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But clothes meet to keepe keene cold away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And naked nature seemely to aray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which bare wretched wights he dayly clad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The images of God in earthly clay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, if that no spare clothes to give he had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His owne cote he would cut, and it distribute glad.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The fourth appointed by his office was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Poore prisoners to relieve with gratious ayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And captives to redeeme with price of bras</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From Turkes and Sarazins, which them had stayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And though they faulty were, yet well he wayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That God to us forgiveth every howre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much more then that why they in bands were layd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he, that harrowd hell with heavie stowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The faulty soules from thence brought to his heavenly bowre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The fift had charge sick persons to attend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And comfort those in point of death which lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For them most needeth comfort in the end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When sin, and hell, and death, doe most dismay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The feeble soule departing hence away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All is but lost, that living we bestow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If not well ended at our dying day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O man! have mind of that last bitter throw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For as the tree does fall, so lyes it ever low.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The sixt had charge of them now being dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In seemely sort their corses to engrave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And deck with dainty flowres their brydall bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to their heavenly spouse both sweet and brave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They might appeare, when he their soules shall save.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wondrous workmanship of Gods owne mould,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose face he made all beastes to feare, and gave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All in his hand, even dead we honour should.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, dearest God, me graunt, I dead be not defould!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The seventh, now after death and buriall done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had charge the tender Orphans of the dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wydowes ayd, least they should be undone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In face of judgement he their right would plead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought the powre of mighty men did dread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In their defence; nor would for gold or fee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be wonne their rightfull causes downe to tread;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, when they stood in most necessitee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He did supply their want, and gave them ever free.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There when the Elfin knight arrived was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The first and chiefest of the seven, whose care</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was guests to welcome, towardes him did pas;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where seeing Mercie, that his steps upbare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And alwaies led, to her with reverence rare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He humbly louted in meeke lowlinesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seemely welcome for her did prepare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For of their order she was Patronesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Albe Charissa were their chiefest founderesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There she awhile him stayes, himselfe to rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to the rest more hable he might bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">During which time, in every good behest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And godly worke of Almes and charitee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee him instructed with great industree.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shortly therein so perfect he became,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, from the first unto the last degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mortall life he learned had to frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In holy righteousnesse, without rebuke or blame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thence forward by that painfull way they pas</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth to an hill that was both steepe and hy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On top whereof a sacred chappell was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke a litle Hermitage thereby,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein an aged holy man did lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That day and night said his devotion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne other worldly busines did apply:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His name was hevenly Contemplation;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of God and goodnes was his meditation.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Great grace that old man to him given had;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For God he often saw from heavens hight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All were his earthly eien both blunt and bad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through great age had lost their kindly sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet wondrous quick and persaunt was his spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Eagles eie that can behold the Sunne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hill they scale with all their powre and might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That his fraile thighes, nigh weary and fordonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gan faile; but by her helpe the top at last he wonne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There they doe finde that godly aged Sire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With snowy lockes adowne his shoulders shed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As hoary frost with spangles doth attire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The mossy braunches of an Oke halfe ded.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each bone might through his body well be red</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every sinew seene, through his long fast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For nought he car’d his carcas long unfed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mind was full of spiritual repast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pyn’d his flesh to keepe his body low and chast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who, when these two approching he aspide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At their first presence grew agrieved sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That forst him lay his hevenly thoughts aside;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And had he not that Dame respected more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom highly he did reverence and adore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He would not once have moved for the knight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They him saluted, standing far afore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, well them greeting, humbly did requight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And asked to what end they clomb that tedious hight?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“What end,” (quoth she) “should cause us take such paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that same end, which every living wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should make his marke high heaven to attaine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is not from hence the way, that leadeth right</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To that most glorious house, that glistreth bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With burning starres and everliving fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof the keies are to thy hand behight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By wise Fidelia? Shee doth thee require,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To shew it to this knight, according his desire.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thrise happy man,” said then the father grave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Whose staggering steps thy steady hand doth lead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shewes the way his sinfull soule to save!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who better can the way to heaven aread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then thou thyselfe, that was both borne and bred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Hevenly throne, where thousand Angels shine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou doest the praiers of the righteous sead</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Present before the majesty divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his avenging wrath to clemency incline.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Yet, since thou bidst, thy pleasure shalbe donne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then come, thou man of earth, and see the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That never yet was seene of Faeries sonne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That never leads the traveiler astray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But after labors long and sad delay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Brings them to joyous rest and endlesse blis.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But first thou must a season fast and pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till from her bands the spright assoiled is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And have her strength recur’d from fraile infirmitis.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That done, he leads him to the highest Mount;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such one as that same mighty man of God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That blood-red billowes, like a walled front,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On either side disparted with his rod,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that his army dry-foot through them yod,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dwelt forty daies upon; where, writt in stone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With bloody letters by the hand of God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bitter doome of death and balefull mone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He did receive, whiles flashing fire about him shone:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Or like that sacred hill, whose head full hie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adornd with fruitfull Olives all arownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is, as it were for endlesse memory</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that deare Lord who oft thereon was fownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ever with a flowring girlond crownd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or like that pleasaunt Mount, that is for ay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through famous Poets verse each where renownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which the thrise three learned Ladies play</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their hevenly notes, and make full many a lovely lay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>From thence, far off he unto him did shew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A little path that was both steepe and long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to a goodly Citty led his vew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose wals and towres were builded high and strong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of perle and precious stone, that earthly tong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cannot describe, nor wit of man can tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Too high a ditty for my simple song.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Citty of the greate king hight it well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein eternall peace and happinesse doth dwell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As he thereon stood gazing, he might see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The blessed Angels to and fro descend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From highest heven in gladsome companee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with great joy into that Citty wend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As commonly as frend does with his frend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat he wondred much, and gan enquere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What stately building durst so high extend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her lofty towres unto the starry sphere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what unknowen nation there empeopled were?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Faire Knight,” (quoth he) “Hierusalem that is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The new Hierusalem, that God has built</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For those to dwell in that are chosen his,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His chosen people, purg’d from sinful guilt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With pretious blood, which cruelly was spilt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On cursed tree, of that unspotted lam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That for the sinnes of al the world was kilt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now are they Saints all in that Citty sam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More dear unto their God then younglings to their dam.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Till now,” said then the knight, “I weened well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That great Cleopolis, where I have beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which that fairest Faery Queene doth dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fairest citty was that might be seene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that bright towre, all built of christall clene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Panthea, seemd the brightest thing that was;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But now by proofe all otherwise I weene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For this great Citty that does far surpas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this bright Angels towre quite dims that towre of glas.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Most trew,” then said the holy aged man;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Yet is Cleopolis, for earthly frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fairest peece that eie beholden can;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And well beseemes all knights of noble name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That covett in th’immortall booke of fame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be eternized, that same to haunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doen their service to that soveraigne Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That glory does to them for guerdon graunt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she is hevenly borne, and heaven may justly vaunt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And thou, faire ymp, sprong out from English race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How ever now accompted Elfins sonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well worthy doest thy service for her grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To aide a virgin desolate, foredonne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when thou famous victory hast wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And high emongst all knights hast hong thy shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thenceforth the suitt of earthly conquest shonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wash thy hands from guilt of bloody field:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For blood can nought but sin, and wars but sorrows yield.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Then seek this path that I to thee presage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which after all to heaven shall thee send;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then peaceably thy painefull pilgrimage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To yonder same Hierusalem doe bend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where is for thee ordaind a blessed end:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thou, emongst those Saints whom thou doest see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shalt be a Saint, and thine owne nations frend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Patrone: thou <em>Saint George</em> shalt called bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><em>Saint George</em> of mery <em>England</em>, the signe of victoree.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Unworthy wretch,” (quoth he) “of so great grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How dare I thinke such glory to attaine?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“These, that have it attaynd, were in like cace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As wretched men, and lived in like paine.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“But deeds of armes must I at last be faine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Ladies love to leave, so dearely bought?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“What need of armes, where peace doth ay remaine,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Said he) “and bitter battailes all are fought?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As for loose loves, they’are vaine, and vanish into nought.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O! let me not,” (quoth he) “then turne againe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Backe to the world, whose joyes so fruitlesse are;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But let me heare for aye in peace remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or streightway on that last long voiage fare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nothing may my present hope empare.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“That may not be,” (said he) “ne maist thou yitt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forgoe that royal maides bequeathed care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who did her cause into thy hand committ,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till from her cursed foe thou have her freely quitt.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Then shall I soone,” (quoth he) “so God me grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abett that virgins cause disconsolate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shortly back returne unto this place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To walke this way in Pilgrims poore estate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But now aread, old father, why of late</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Didst thou behight me borne of English blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom all a Faeries sonne doen nominate?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“That word shall I,” (said he) “avouchen good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sith to thee is unknowne the cradle of thy brood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“For, well I wote, thou springst from ancient race</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Saxon kinges, that have with mightie hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many bloody battailes fought in face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">High reard their royall throne in Britans land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And vanquisht them, unable to withstand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From thence a Faery thee unweeting reft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There as thou slepst in tender swadling band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her base Elfin brood there for thee left:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such, men do Chaungelings call, so chaung’d by Faeries theft.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thence she thee brought into this Faery lond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in an heaped furrow did thee hyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where thee a Ploughman all unweeting fond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he his toylesome teme that way did guyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And brought thee up in ploughmans state to byde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof Georgos he thee gave to name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till prickt with courage, and thy forces pryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Faery court thou cam’st to seek for fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And prove thy puissant armes, as seemes thee best became.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O holy Sire!” (quoth he) “how shall I quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The many favours I with thee have fownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hast my name and nation redd aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And taught the way that does to heaven bownd!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This saide, adowne he looked to the grownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To have returnd; but dazed were his eyne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through passing brightnes, which did quite confound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His feeble sence, and too exceeding shyne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So darke are earthly thinges compar’d to things divine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last, whenas himselfe he gan to fynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Una back he cast him to retyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who him awaited still with pensive mynd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great thankes, and goodly meed, to that good syre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He thens departing gave for his paynes hyre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So came to Una, who him joyd to see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, after litle rest, gan him desyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her adventure myndfull for to bee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So leave they take of Cælia and her daughters three.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-11" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The knight with that old Dragon fights</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Two days incessantly:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The third him overthrowes, and gayns</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Most glorious victory.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>High time now gan it wex for Una fayre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To thinke of those her captive Parents deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And their forwasted kingdom to repayre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereto whenas they now approched neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hartie wordes her knight she gan to cheare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in her modest maner thus bespake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Deare knight, as deare as ever knight was deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all these sorrowes suffer for my sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High heven behold the tedious toyle ye for me take!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Now are we come unto my native soyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the place where all our perilles dwell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here hauntes that feend, and does his dayly spoyle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore, henceforth, bee at your keeping well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever ready for your foeman fell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sparke of noble corage now awake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strive your excellent selfe to excell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shall ye evermore renowmed make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above all knights on earth, that batteill undertake.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And pointing forth, “Lo! yonder is,” (said she)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“The brasen towre, in which my parents deare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For dread of that huge feend emprisond be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom I from far see on the walles appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose sight my feeble soule doth greatly cheare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on the top of all I do espye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The watchman wayting tydings glad to heare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, (O my Parents!) might I happily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto you bring, to ease you of your misery!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that they heard a roaring hideous sownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the ayre with terror filled wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seemd uneath to shake the stedfast ground.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones that dreadful Dragon they espyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where stretcht he lay upon the sunny side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of a great hill, himselfe like a great hill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, all so soone as he from far descryde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those glistring armes that heven with light did fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He rousd himselfe full blyth, and hastned them untill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then badd the knight his Lady yede aloof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to an hill herselfe withdraw asyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whence she might behold that battailles proof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke be safe from daunger far descryde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She him obayd, and turnd a little wyde.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now, O thou sacred Muse! most learned Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayre ympe of Phœbus and his aged bryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Nourse of time and everlasting fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That warlike handes ennoblest with immortall name;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O! gently come into my feeble brest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Come gently, but not with that mightie rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith the martiall troupes thou doest infest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hartes of great Heroës doest enrage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nought their kindled corage may aswage:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone as thy dreadfull trompe begins to sownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The God of warre with his fiers equipage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou doest awake, sleepe never he so sownd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And scared nations doest with horror sterne astownd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Fayre Goddesse, lay that furious fitt asyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till I of warres and bloody Mars doe sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Bryton fieldes with Sarazin blood be dyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Twixt that great faery Queene and Paynim king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with their horror heven and earth did ring;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A worke of labour long, and endlesse prayse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But now a while lett downe that haughtie string,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to my tunes thy second tenor rayse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I this man of God his godly armes may blaze.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By this, the dreadful Beast drew nigh to hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Halfe flying and halfe footing in his haste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with his largenesse measured much land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made wide shadow under his huge waste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As mountaine doth the valley overcaste.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Approching nigh, he reared high afore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His body monstrous, horrible, and vaste;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, to increase his wondrous greatnes more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was swoln with wrath and poyson, and with bloody gore;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And over all with brasen scales was armd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like plated cote of steele, so couched neare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nought mote perce; ne might his corse bee harmd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With dint of swerd, nor push of pointed speare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which as an Eagle, seeing pray appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His aery plumes doth rouze, full rudely dight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So shaked he, that horror was to heare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For as the clashing of an Armor bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such noyse his rouzed scales did send unto the knight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His flaggy winges, when forth he did display,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were like two sayles, in which the hollow wynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is gathered full, and worketh speedy way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the pennes, that did his pineons bynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were like mayne-yardes with flying canvas lynd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which whenas him list the ayre to beat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there by force unwonted passage fynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cloudes before him fledd for terror great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the hevens stood still amazed with his threat.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His huge long tayle, wownd up in hundred foldes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Does overspred his long bras-scaly back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose wreathed boughtes when ever he unfoldes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thick entangled knots adown does slack,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bespotted as with shieldes of red and blacke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It sweepeth all the land behind him farre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of three furlongs does but litle lacke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at the point two stinges in fixed arre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both deadly sharp, that sharpest steele exceeden farre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But stinges and sharpest steele did far exceed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sharpnesse of his cruel rending clawes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dead was it sure, as sure as death in deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What ever thing does touch his ravenous pawes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or what within his reach he ever drawes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But his most hideous head my tongue to tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Does tremble; for his deepe devouring jawes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wyde gaped, like the griesly mouth of hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through which into his darke abysse all ravin fell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, that more wondrous was, in either jaw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Three ranckes of yron teeth enraunged were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which yett trickling blood, and gobbets raw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of late devoured bodies did appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sight thereof bredd cold congealed feare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to increase, and all atonce to kill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A cloud of smoothering smoke, and sulphure seare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of his stinking gorge forth steemed still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all the ayre about with smoke and stench did fill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His blazing eyes, like two bright shining shieldes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did burne with wrath, and sparkled living fyre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As two broad Beacons, sett in open fieldes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Send forth their flames far off to every shyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And warning give that enimies conspyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With fire and sword the region to invade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So flam’d his eyne with rage and rancorous yre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But far within, as in a hollow glade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those glaring lampes were sett that made a dreadfull shade.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So dreadfully he towardes him did pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forelifting up aloft his speckled brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And often bounding on the brused gras,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As for great joyance of his newcome guest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones he gan advance his haughty crest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As chauffed Bore his bristles doth upreare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shoke his scales to battaile ready drest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That made the Redcrosse knight nigh quake for feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As bidding bold defyaunce to his foeman neare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The knight gan fayrely couch his steady speare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fiersely ran at him with rigorous might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The pointed steele, arriving rudely theare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His harder hyde would nether perce nor bight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, glauncing by, foorth passed forward right.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet sore amoved with so puissaunt push,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wrathfull beast about him turned light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him so rudely, passing by, did brush</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With his long tayle, that horse and man to ground did rush.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Both horse and man up lightly rose againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fresh encounter towardes him addrest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But th’ydle stroke yet backe recoyld in vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And found no place his deadly point to rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Exceeding rage enflam’d the furious Beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be avenged of so great despight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For never felt his imperceable brest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So wondrous force from hand of living wight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet had he prov’d the powre of many a puissant knight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then, with his waving wings displayed wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himselfe up high he lifted from the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with strong flight did forcibly divyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The yielding ayre, which nigh too feeble found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her flitting parts, and element unsound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To beare so great a weight: he, cutting way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his broad sayles, about him soared round;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last, low stouping with unweldy sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Snatcht up both horse and man, to beare them quite away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Long he them bore above the subject plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So far as Ewghen bow a shaft may send,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till struggling strong did him at last constraine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To let them downe before his flightes end:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As hagard hauke, presuming to contend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hardy fowle above his hable might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His wearie pounces all in vaine doth spend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To trusse the pray too heavy for his flight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, comming down to ground, does free it selfe by fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He so disseized of his gryping grosse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The knight his thrillant speare againe assayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his bras-plated body to embosse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And three mens strength unto the stroake he layd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith the stiffe beame quaked as affrayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And glauncing from his scaly necke did glyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Close under his left wing, then broad displayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The percing steele there wrought a wound full wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That with the uncouth smart the Monster lowdly cryde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He cryde, as raging seas are wont to rore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When wintry storme his wrathful wreck does threat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rolling billowes beate the ragged shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As they the earth would shoulder from her seat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And greedy gulfe does gape, as he would eat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His neighbour element in his revenge:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gin the blustring brethren boldly threat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To move the world from off his stedfast henge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And boystrous battaile make, each other to avenge.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The steely head stuck fast still in his flesh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till with his cruell clawes he snatcht the wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And quite a sunder broke. Forth flowed fresh</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A gushing river of blacke gory blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That drowned all the land whereon he stood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The streame thereof would drive a water-mill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Trebly augmented was his furious mood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With bitter sence of his deepe rooted ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That flames of fire he threw forth from his large nosethril.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His hideous tayle then hurled he about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therewith all enwrapt the nimble thyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his froth-fomy steed, whose courage stout</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Striving to loose the knott that fast him tyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himselfe in streighter bandes too rash implyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to the ground he is perforce constraynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To throw his ryder; who can quickly ryse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From off the earth, with durty blood distaynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that reprochfull fall right fowly he disdaynd;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And fercely tooke his trenchand blade in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which he stroke so furious and so fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nothing seemd the puissaunce could withstand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his crest the hardned yron fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But his more hardned crest was armd so well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That deeper dint therein it would not make;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet so extremely did the buffe him quell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from thenceforth he shund the like to take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when he saw them come he did them still forsake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The knight was wroth to see his stroke beguyld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And smot againe with more outrageous might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But backe againe the sparcling steele recoyld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And left not any marke where it did light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if in Adamant rocke it had beene pight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The beast, impatient of his smarting wound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of so fierce and forcible despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thought with his winges to stye above the ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But his late wounded wing unserviceable found.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then full of griefe and anguish vehement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He lowdly brayd, that like was never heard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from his wide devouring oven sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A flake of fire, that flashing in his beard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him all amazd, and almost made afeard:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The scorching flame sore swinged all his face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through his armour all his body seard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he could not endure so cruell cace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thought his armes to leave, and helmet to unlace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Not that great Champion of the antique world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom famous Poetes verse so much doth vaunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hath for twelve huge labours high extold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So many furies and sharpe fits did haunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When him the poysoned garment did enchaunt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Centaures blood, and bloody verses charmd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As did this knight twelve thousand dolours daunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom fyrie steele now burnt, that erst him arm’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That erst him goodly arm’d, now most of all him harm’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Faynt, wearie, sore, emboyled, grieved, brent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With heat, toyle, wounds, armes, smart, and inward fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That never man such mischiefes did torment:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Death better were; death did he oft desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But death will never come when needes require.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom so dismayd when that his foe beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He cast to suffer him no more respire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But gan his sturdy sterne about to weld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And him so strongly stroke, that to the ground him feld.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It fortuned, (as fayre it then befell)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behynd his backe, unweeting, where he stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of auncient time there was a springing well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From which fast trickled forth a silver flood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of great vertues, and for med’cine good:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whylome, before that cursed Dragon got</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That happy land, and all with innocent blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Defyld those sacred waves, it rightly hot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The well of life, ne yet his vertues had forgot:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For unto life the dead it could restore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And guilt of sinfull crimes cleane wash away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those that with sicknesse were infected sore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It could recure; and aged long decay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Renew, as one were borne that very day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both Silo this, and Jordan, did excell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And th’English Bath, and eke the German Spau;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne can Cephise, nor Hebrus, match this well:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the same the knight back overthrowen fell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now gan the golden Phœbus for to steepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His fierie face in billowes of the west,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his faint steedes watred in Ocean deepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles from their journall labours they did rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When that infernall Monster, having kest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His wearie foe into that living well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan high advaunce his broad discoloured brest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above his wonted pitch, with countenance fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And clapt his yron wings as victor he did dwell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when his pensive Lady saw from farre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great woe and sorrow did her soule assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As weening that the sad end of the warre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gan to highest God entirely pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That feared chaunce from her to turne away:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With folded hands, and knees full lowly bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All night shee watcht, ne once adowne would lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her dainty limbs in her sad dreriment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But praying still did wake, and waking did lament.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The morrow next gan earely to appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Titan rose to runne his daily race;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But earely, ere the morrow next gan reare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the sea faire Titans deawy face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Up rose the gentle virgin from her place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And looked all about, if she might spy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her loved knight to move his manly pace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she had great doubt of his safety,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since late she saw him fall before his enimy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last she saw where he upstarted brave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the well, wherein he drenched lay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Eagle, fresh out of the ocean wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where he hath lefte his plumes all hory gray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And deckt himselfe with fethers youthly gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like Eyas hauke up mounts unto the skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His newly-budded pineons to assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And marveiles at himselfe stil as he flies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So new this newborne knight to battell new did rise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when the damned feend so fresh did spy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No wonder if he wondred at the sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doubted whether his late enimy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It were, or other new supplied knight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He now, to prove his late-renewed might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">High brandishing his bright deaw-burning blade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his crested scalp so sore did smite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to the scull a yawning wound it made:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The deadly dint his dulled sences all dismaid.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I wote not whether the revenging steele</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were hardned with that holy water dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein he fell, or sharper edge did feele,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or his baptized hands now greater grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or other secret vertue did ensew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Els never could the force of fleshly arme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne molten mettall, in his blood embrew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For till that stownd could never wight him harme</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By subtilty, nor slight, nor might, nor mighty charme.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The cruell wound enraged him so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That loud he yelled for exceeding paine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As hundred ramping Lions seemd to rore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom ravenous hunger did thereto constraine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan he tosse aloft his stretched traine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therewith scourge the buxome aire so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to his force to yielden it was faine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought his sturdy strokes might stand afore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That high trees overthrew, and rocks in peeces tore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The same advauncing high above his head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sharpe intended sting so rude him smott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to the earth him drove, as stricken dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne living wight would have him life behott:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The mortall sting his angry needle shott</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quite through his shield, and in his shoulder seasd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where fast it stucke, ne would thereout be gott:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The griefe thereof him wondrous sore diseasd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne might his rancling paine with patience be appeasd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But yet, more mindfull of his honour deare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then of the grievous smart which him did wring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From loathed soile he can him lightly reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strove to loose the far infixed sting:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when in vaine he tryde with struggeling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Inflam’d with wrath, his raging blade he hefte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strooke so strongly, that the knotty string</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his huge taile he quite a sonder clefte;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Five joints thereof he hewd, and but the stump him lefte.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hart cannot thinke what outrage and what cries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With fowle enfouldred smoake and flashing fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hell-bred beast threw forth unto the skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all was covered with darknesse dire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, fraught with rancour and engorged yre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He cast at once him to avenge for all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, gathering up himselfe out of the mire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his uneven wings, did fiercely fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his sunne-bright shield, and grypt it fast withall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Much was the man encombred with his hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In feare to lose his weapon in his paw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne wist yett how his talaunts to unfold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor harder was from Cerberus greedy jaw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To plucke a bone, then from his cruell claw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To reave by strength the griped gage away:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrise he assayd it from his foote to draw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thrise in vaine to draw it did assay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It booted nought to thinke to robbe him of his pray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho, when he saw no power might prevaile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His trusty sword he cald to his last aid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith he fiersly did his foe assaile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And double blowes about him stoutly laid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That glauncing fire out of the yron plaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As sparkles from the Andvile use to fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When heavy hammers on the wedge are swaid:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith at last he forst him to unty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One of his grasping feete, him to defend thereby.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The other foote, fast fixed on his shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whenas no strength nor stroks mote him constraine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To loose, ne yet the warlike pledge to yield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He smott thereat with all his might and maine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nought so wondrous puissaunce might sustaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the joint the lucky steele did light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made such way that hewd it quite in twaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The paw yett missed not his minisht might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But hong still on the shield, as it at first was pight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For griefe thereof and divelish despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From his infernall fournace forth he threw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Huge flames that dimmed all the hevens light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enrold in duskish smoke and brimstone blew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As burning Aetna from his boyling stew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth belch out flames, and rockes in peeces broke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ragged ribs of mountaines molten new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enwrapt in cole-blacke clowds and filthy smoke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all the land with stench and heven with horror choke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The heate whereof, and harmefull pestilence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So sore him noyd, that forst him to retire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A little backeward for his best defence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To save his body from the scorching fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he from hellish entrailes did expire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It chaunst, (eternall God that chaunce did guide)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he recoiled backeward, in the mire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His nigh foreweried feeble feet did slide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And downe he fell, with dread of shame sore terrifide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There grew a goodly tree him faire beside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Loaden with fruit and apples rosy redd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As they in pure vermilion had been dide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof great vertues over-all were redd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For happy life to all which thereon fedd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And life eke everlasting did befall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great God it planted in that blessed stedd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his Almighty hand, and did it call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tree of life, the crime of our first fathers fall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In all the world like was not to be fownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save in that soile, where all good things did grow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And freely sprong out of the fruitfull grownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As incorrupted Nature did them sow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that dredd Dragon all did overthrow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another like faire tree eke grew thereby,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof whoso did eat, eftsoones did know</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both good and ill. O mournfull memory!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That tree through one mans fault hath doen us all to dy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>From that first tree forth flowd, as from a well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A trickling streame of Balme, most soveraine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dainty deare, which on the ground still fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And overflowed all the fertile plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As it had deawed bene with timely raine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Life and long health that gracious ointment gave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And deadly wounds could heale, and reare againe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sencelesse corse appointed for the grave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into that same he fell, which did from death him save.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For nigh thereto the ever damned Beast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Durst not approch, for he was deadly made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And al that life preserved did detest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet he it oft adventur’d to invade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By this the drouping day-light gan to fade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yield his rowme to sad succeeding night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who with her sable mantle gan to shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The face of earth and wayes of living wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And high her burning torch set up in heaven bright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When gentle Una saw the second fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her deare knight, who, weary of long fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And faint through losse of blood, moov’d not at all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But lay, as in a dreame of deepe delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besmeard with pretious Balme, whose vertuous might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did heale his woundes, and scorching heat alay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Againe she stricken was with sore affright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for his safetie gan devoutly pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And watch the noyous night, and wait for joyous day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The joyous day gan early to appeare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fayre Aurora from the deawy bed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of aged Tithone gan herselfe to reare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With rosy cheekes, for shame as blushing red:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her golden locks for hast were loosely shed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About her eares, when Una her did marke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Clymbe to her charet, all with flowers spred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From heven high to chace the chearelesse darke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With mery note her lowd salutes the mounting larke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then freshly up arose the doughty knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All healed of his hurts and woundes wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did himselfe to battaile ready dight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose early foe awaiting him beside</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To have devourd, so soone as day he spyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When now he saw himselfe so freshly reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if late fight had nought him damnifyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He woxe dismaid, and gan his fate to feare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nathlesse with wonted rage he him advaunced neare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And in his first encounter, gaping wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He thought attonce him to have swallowd quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rusht upon him with outragious pryde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who him rencountring fierce, as hauke in flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perforce rebutted backe. The weapon bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Taking advantage of his open jaw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ran through his mouth with so importune might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That deepe emperst his darksom hollow maw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, back retyrd, his life blood forth with all did draw.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So downe he fell, and forth his life did breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That vanisht into smoke and cloudes swift;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So downe he fell, that th’earth him underneath</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did grone, as feeble so great load to lift;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So downe he fell, as an huge rocky clift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose false foundacion waves have washt away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With dreadfull poyse is from the mayneland rift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rolling downe great Neptune doth dismay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So downe he fell, and like an heaped mountaine lay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The knight him selfe even trembled at his fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So huge and horrible a masse it seemd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his deare Lady, that beheld it all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Durst not approch for dread which she misdeemd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yet at last, whenas the direfull feend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She saw not stirre, off-shaking vaine affright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She nigher drew, and saw that joyous end:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then God she praysd, and thankt her faithfull knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That had atchievde so great a conquest by his might.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-1-12" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Fayre Una to the Redcrosse Knight</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Betrothed is with joy:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though false Duessa, it to barre,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Her false sleightes doe imploy.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Behold! I see the haven nigh at hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which I meane my wearie course to bend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vere the maine shete, and beare up with the land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which afore is fayrly to be kend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seemeth safe from storms that may offend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There this fayre virgin wearie of her way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Must landed bee, now at her journeyes end;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There eke my feeble barke a while may stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till mery wynd and weather call her thence away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Scarsely had Phœbus in the glooming East</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yett harnessed his fyrie-footed teeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne reard above the earth his flaming creast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When the last deadly smoke aloft did steeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That signe of last outbreathed life did seeme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the watchman on the castle-wall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who thereby dead that balefull Beast did deeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to his Lord and Lady lowd gan call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tell how he had seene the Dragons fatall fall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Uprose with hasty joy, and feeble speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That aged Syre, the lord of all that land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And looked forth, to weet if trew indeed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those tydinges were, as he did understand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which whenas trew by tryall he out fond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He badd to open wyde his brasen gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which long time had beene shut, and out of hond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proclaymed joy and peace through all his state;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For dead now was their foe, which them forrayed late.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then gan triumphant Trompets sownd on hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sent to heven the ecchoed report</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of their new joy, and happie victory</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst him, that had them long opprest with tort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fast imprisoned in sieged fort.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then all the people, as in solemne feast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To him assembled with one full consort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rejoycing at the fall of that great beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From whose eternall bondage now they were releast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Forth came that auncient Lord, and aged Queene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arayd in antique robes downe to the grownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sad habiliments right well beseene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A noble crew about them waited rownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of sage and sober peres, all gravely gownd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom far before did march a goodly band</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of tall young men, all hable armes to sownd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But now they laurell braunches bore in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glad signe of victory and peace in all their land.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Unto that doughtie Conquerour they came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him before themselves prostrating low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their Lord and Patrone loud did him proclame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at his feet their lawrell boughes did throw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone after them, all dauncing on a row,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The comely virgins came, with girlands dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As fresh as flowres in medow greene doe grow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When morning deaw upon their leaves doth light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in their handes sweet Timbrels all upheld on hight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And them before the fry of children yong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their wanton sportes and childish mirth did play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the Maydens sownding tymbrels song</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In well attuned notes a joyous lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made delightfull musick all the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill they came where that faire virgin stood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As fayre Diana in fresh sommers day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beholdes her nymphes enraung’d in shady wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some wrestle, some do run, some bathe in christall flood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So she beheld those maydens meriment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With chearefull vew; who, when to her they came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Themselves to ground with gracious humblesse bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her ador’d by honorable name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lifting to heven her everlasting fame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then on her head they sett a girlond greene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And crowned her twixt earnest and twixt game:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, in her self-resemblance well beseene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did seeme, such as she was, a goodly maiden Queene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And after all the raskall many ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Heaped together in rude rablement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see the face of that victorious man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom all admired as from heaven sent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gazd upon with gaping wonderment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when they came where that dead Dragon lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stretcht on the ground in monstrous large extent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sight with ydle feare did them dismay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne durst approch him nigh to touch, or once assay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Some feard, and fledd; some feard, and well it faynd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One, that would wiser seeme then all the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Warnd him not touch, for yet perhaps remaynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some lingring life within his hollow brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or in his wombe might lurke some hidden nest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of many Dragonettes, his fruitfull seede:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another saide, that in his eyes did rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet sparckling fyre, and badd thereof take heed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another said, he saw him move his eyes indeed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One mother, whenas her foolehardy chyld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did come too neare, and with his talants play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Halfe dead through feare, her litle babe revyld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to her gossibs gan in counsell say;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“How can I tell, but that his talants may</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet scratch my sonne, or rend his tender hand?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So diversly them selves in vaine they fray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles some more bold to measure him nigh stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To prove how many acres he did spred of land.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus flocked all the folke him rownd about;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles that hoarie king, with all his traine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being arrived where that champion stout</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After his foes defeasaunce did remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him goodly greetes, and fayre does entertayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With princely gifts of yvory and gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thousand thankes him yeeldes for all his paine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then when his daughter deare he does behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her dearely doth imbrace, and kisseth manifold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And after to his Pallace he them bringes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With shaumes, and trompets, and with Clarions sweet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the way the joyous people singes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with their garments strowes the paved street;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence mounting up, they fynd purveyaunce meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all, that royall Princes court became;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the floore was underneath their feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bespredd with costly scarlott of great name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On which they lowly sitt, and fitting purpose frame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>What needes me tell their feast and goodly guize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which was nothing riotous nor vaine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What needes of dainty dishes to devize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of comely services, or courtly trayne?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My narrow leaves cannot in them contayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The large discourse of roiall Princes state.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was their manner then but bare and playne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For th’antique world excesse and pryde did hate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such proud luxurious pompe is swollen up but late.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then, when with meates and drinkes of every kinde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their fervent appetites they quenched had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That auncient Lord gan fit occasion finde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of straunge adventures, and of perils sad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which in his travell him befallen had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For to demaund of his renowmed guest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who then with utt’rance grave, and count’nance sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From poynt to poynt, as is before exprest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Discourst his voyage long, according his request.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Great pleasure, mixt with pittifull regard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That godly King and Queene did passionate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whyles they his pittifull adventures heard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That oft they did lament his lucklesse state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And often blame the too importune fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That heapd on him so many wrathfull wreakes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For never gentle knight, as he of late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So tossed was in fortunes cruell freakes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the while salt teares bedeawd the hearers cheaks.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then sayd that royall Pere in sober wise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Deare Sonne, great beene the evils which ye bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From first to last in your late enterprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I note whether praise or pitty more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For never living man, I weene, so sore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In sea of deadly daungers was distrest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But since now safe ye seised have the shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And well arrived are, (high God be blest!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let us devize of ease and everlasting rest.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ah dearest Lord!” said then that doughty knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Of ease or rest I may not yet devize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For by the faith which I to armes have plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I bownden am streight after this emprize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As that your daughter can ye well advize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Backe to retourne to that great Faery Queene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her to serve sixe yeares in warlike wize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst that proud Paynim king that works her teene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore I ought crave pardon, till I there have beene.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Unhappy falls that hard necessity,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Quoth he) “the troubler of my happy peace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And vowed foe of my felicity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne I against the same can justly preace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But since that band ye cannot now release,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor doen undo, (for vowes may not be vayne)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone as the terme of those six yeares shall cease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye then shall hither backe retourne agayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The marriage to accomplish vowd betwixt you twayn.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Which, for my part, I covet to performe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In sort as through the world I did proclame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That whoso kild that monster most deforme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him in hardy battayle overcame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should have mine onely daughter to his Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of my kingdome heyre apparaunt bee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore, since now to thee perteynes the same</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By dew desert of noble chevalree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both daughter and eke kingdome lo! I yield to thee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then forth he called that his daughter fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fairest Un’, his onely daughter deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His onely daughter and his only hayre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who forth proceeding with sad sober cheare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As bright as doth the morning starre appeare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the East, with flaming lockes bedight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tell that dawning day is drawing neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the world does bring long-wished light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So faire and fresh that Lady shewd herselfe in sight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So faire and fresh, as freshest flowre in May;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she had layd her mournefull stole aside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And widow-like sad wimple throwne away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith her heavenly beautie she did hide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles on her wearie journey she did ride;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on her now a garment she did weare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All lilly white, withoutten spot or pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemd like silke and silver woven neare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But neither silke nor silver therein did appeare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The blazing brightnesse of her beauties beame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And glorious light of her sunshyny face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tell were as to strive against the streame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My ragged rimes are all too rude and bace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her heavenly lineaments for to enchace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne wonder; for her own deare loved knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All were she daily with himselfe in place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did wonder much at her celestial sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oft had he seene her faire, but never so faire dight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So fairely dight when she in presence came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She to her Syre made humble reverence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bowed low, that her right well became,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And added grace unto her excellence:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who with great wisedome and grave eloquence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus gan to say⁠—But, eare he thus had sayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With flying speede, and seeming great pretence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came running in, much like a man dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A messenger with letters, which his message sayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All in the open hall amazed stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At suddeinnesse of that unwary sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wondred at his breathlesse hasty mood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he for nought would stay his passage right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till fast before the king he did alight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where falling flat great humblesse he did make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And kist the ground whereon his foot was pight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then to his handes that writt he did betake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which he disclosing read thus, as the paper spake:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“To thee, most mighty king of Eden fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her greeting sends in these sad lines addrest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wofull daughter and forsaken heyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that great Emperour of all the West;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bids thee be advized for the best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere thou thy daughter linck in holy band</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of wedlocke to that new unknowen guest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he already plighted his right hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto another love, and to another land.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“To me, sad mayd, or rather widow sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He was affyaunced long time before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sacred pledges he both gave, and had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">False erraunt knight, infamous, and forswore!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Witnesse the burning Altars, which he swore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And guilty heavens of his bold perjury;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which though he hath polluted oft of yore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet I to them for judgement just doe fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And them conjure t’avenge this shamefull injury.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Therefore, since mine he is, or free or bond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or false or trew, or living or else dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withhold, O soverayne Prince! your hasty hond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From knitting league with him, I you aread;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne weene my right with strength adowne to tread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through weaknesse of my widowhed or woe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For truth is strong her rightfull cause to plead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shall finde friends, if need requireth soe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So bids thee well to fare, Thy neither friend nor foe, <em>Fidessa</em>.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When he these bitter byting wordes had red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The tydings straunge did him abashed make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That still he sate long time astonished,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As in great muse, ne word to creature spake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last his solemn silence thus he brake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With doubtfull eyes fast fixed on his guest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Redoubted knight, that for myne only sake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy life and honor late adventurest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let nought be hid from me that ought to be exprest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“What meane these bloody vowes and idle threats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throwne out from womanish impatient mynd?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What hevens? what altars? what enraged heates,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here heaped up with termes of love unkynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My conscience cleare with guilty bands would bynd?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">High God be witnesse that I guiltlesse ame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if yourselfe, Sir knight, ye faulty fynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or wrapped be in loves of former Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With cryme doe not it cover, but disclose the same.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom the Redcrosse knight this answere sent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“My Lord, my king, be nought hereat dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till well ye wote by grave intendiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What woman, and wherefore, doth me upbrayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With breach of love and loialty betrayd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It was in my mishaps, as hitherward</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I lately traveild, that unwares I strayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of my way, through perils straunge and hard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That day should faile me ere I had them all declard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“There did I find, or rather I was fownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of this false woman that Fidessa hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fidessa hight the falsest Dame on grownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most false Duessa, royall richly dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That easy was t’inveigle weaker sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who by her wicked arts and wylie skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Too false and strong for earthly skill or might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unwares me wrought unto her wicked will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to my foe betrayd when least I feared ill.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then stepped forth the goodly royall Mayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on the ground herselfe prostrating low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sober countenance thus to him sayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“O! pardon me, my soveraine Lord, to sheow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The secret treasons, which of late I know</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To have bene wrought by that false sorceresse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee, onely she, it is, that earst did throw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This gentle knight into so great distresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That death him did awaite in daily wretchednesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And now it seemes, that she suborned hath</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This crafty messenger with letters vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To worke new woe and improvided scath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By breaking of the band betwixt us twaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein she used hath the practicke paine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of this false footman, clokt with simplenesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whome if ye please for to discover plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye shall him Archimago find, I ghesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The falsest man alive: who tries, shall find no lesse.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The king was greatly moved at her speach;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, all with suddein indignation fraight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bad on that Messenger rude hands to reach.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones the Gard, which on his state did wait,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Attacht that faytor false, and bound him strait,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who seeming sorely chauffed at his band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As chained beare whom cruell dogs doe bait,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With ydle force did faine them to withstand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And often semblaunce made to scape out of their hand.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But they him layd full low in dungeon deepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bound him hand and foote with yron chains;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with continual watch did warely keepe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who then would thinke that by his subtile trains</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He could escape fowle death or deadly pains?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus, when that Princes wrath was pacifide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan renew the late forbidden bains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the knight his daughter deare he tyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sacred rites and vowes for ever to abyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His owne two hands the holy knotts did knitt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none but death for ever can divide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His owne two hands, for such a turne most fitt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The housling fire did kindle and provide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And holy water thereon sprinckled wide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At which the bushy Teade a groome did light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sacred lamp in secret chamber hide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where it should not be quenched day nor night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For feare of evil fates, but burnen ever bright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then gan they sprinckle all the posts with wine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made great feast to solemnize that day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They all perfumde with frankincense divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And precious odours fetcht from far away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the house did sweat with great aray:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the while sweete Musicke did apply</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her curious skill the warbling notes to play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To drive away the dull Melancholy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whiles one sung a song of love and jollity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>During the which there was an heavenly noise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Heard sownd through all the Pallace pleasantly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as it had bene many an Angels voice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Singing before th’eternall majesty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In their trinall triplicities on hye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yett wist no creature whence that hevenly sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proceeded, yet each one felt secretly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himselfe thereby refte of his sences meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ravished with rare impression in his sprite.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Great joy was made that day of young and old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And solemne feast proclaymd throughout the land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That their exceeding merth may not be told:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Suffice it heare by signes to understand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The usuall joyes at knitting of loves band.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrise happy man the knight himselfe did hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Possessed of his Ladies hart and hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever, when his eie did her behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His heart did seeme to melt in pleasures manifold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her joyous presence and sweet company</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In full content he there did long enjoy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne wicked envy, ne vile gealosy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His deare delights were hable to annoy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, swimming in that sea of blisfull joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He nought forgott how he whilome had sworne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In case he could that monstrous beast destroy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto his Faery Queene backe to retourne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which he shortly did, and Una left to mourne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now, strike your sailes, yee jolly Mariners,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For we be come unto a quiet rode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where we must land some of our passengers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And light this weary vessell of her lode:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here she a while may make her safe abode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till she repaired have her tackles spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wants supplide; And then againe abroad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On the long voiage whereto she is bent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well may she speede, and fairely finish her intent!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
