<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book II: Containing the Legend of Sir Guyon, or of Temperance</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-2" epub:type="part z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Containing the Legend of Sir Guyon, or of Temperance</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="book-2-prologue" epub:type="prologue">
				<p>
					<span>Right well I wote, most mighty Soveraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all this famous antique history</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of some th’aboundance of an ydle braine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will judged be, and painted forgery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rather then matter of just memory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith none that breatheth living aire does know</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where is that happy land of Faery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which I so much doe vaunt, yet no where show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But vouch antiquities, which no body can know.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But let that man with better sence advize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of the world least part to us is red;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And daily how, through hardy enterprize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Many great Regions are discovered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to late age were never mentioned.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who ever heard of th’Indian Peru?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or who in venturous vessell measured</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Amazon huge river, now found trew?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or fruitfullest Virginia who did ever vew?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet all these were, when no man did them know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet have from wisest ages hidden beene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And later times thinges more unknowne shall show.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why then should witlesse man so much misweene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nothing is but that which he hath seene?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What if within the Moones fayre shining spheare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What if in every other starre unseene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of other worldes he happily should heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He wonder would much more; yet such to some appeare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Of Faery lond yet if he more inquyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By certein signes, here sett in sondrie place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He may it fynd; ne let him then admyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yield his sence to bee too blunt and bace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That no’te without an hound fine footing trace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thou, O fayrest Princesse under sky!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In this fayre mirrhour maist behold thy face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thine owne realmes in lond of Faery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in this antique ymage thy great auncestry.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The which O! pardon me thus to enfold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In covert vele, and wrap in shadowes light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That feeble eyes your glory may behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which ells could not endure those beames bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But would bee dazled with exceeding light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O! pardon, and vouchsafe with patient eare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The brave adventures of this faery knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The good Sir Guyon, gratiously to heare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In whom great rule of Temp’raunce goodly doth appeare.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Guyon, by Archimage abusd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The Redcrosse knight awaytes;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Findes mordant and Amavia slaine</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With Pleasures poisoned baytes.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>That conning Architect of cancred guyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom Princes late displeasure left in bands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For falsed letters, and suborned wyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone as the Redcrosse knight he understands</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To beene departed out of Eden landes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To serve againe his soveraine Elfin Queene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His artes he moves, and out of caytives handes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himselfe he frees by secret meanes unseene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His shackles emptie lefte, himselfe escaped cleene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And forth he fares, full of malicious mynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To worken mischiefe, and avenging woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where ever he that godly knight may fynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His onely hart-sore, and his onely foe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith Una now he algates must forgoe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom his victorious handes did earst restore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To native crowne and kingdom late ygoe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where she enjoyes sure peace for evermore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As wetherbeaten ship arryv’d on happie shore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Him therefore now the object of his spight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And deadly food he makes: him to offend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By forged treason or by open fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He seekes, of all his drifte the aymed end:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereto his subtile engins he does bend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His practick witt and his fayre fyled tonge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With thousand other sleightes; for well he kend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His credit now in doubtfull ballaunce hong:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For hardly could bee hurt who was already stong.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Still as he went he craftie stales did lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With cunning traynes him to entrap unwares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And privy spyals plast in all his way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weete what course he takes, and how he fares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To ketch him at a vauntage in his snares.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But now so wise and wary was the knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By tryall of his former harmes and cares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he descryde and shonned still his slight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fish that once was caught new bait wil hardly byte.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nath’lesse th’Enchaunter would not spare his payne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hope to win occasion to his will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when he long awaited had in vayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He chaungd his mynd from one to other ill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For to all good he enimy was still.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the way him fortuned to meete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayre marching underneath a shady hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A goodly knight, all armd in harnesse meete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That from his head no place appeared to his feete.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His carriage was full comely and upright;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His countenance demure and temperate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yett so sterne and terrible in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That cheard his friendes, and did his foes amate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He was an Elfin borne of noble state</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mickle worship in his native land;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well could he tourney, and in lists debate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And knighthood tooke of good Sir Huons hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When with king Oberon he came to Faery land.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Him als accompanyd upon the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A comely Palmer, clad in black attyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of rypest yeares, and heares all hoarie gray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with a staffe his feeble steps did stire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least his long way his aged limbes should tire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, if by lookes one may the mind aread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He seemd to be a sage and sober syre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever with slow pace the knight did lead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who taught his trampling steed with equall steps to tread.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such whenas Archimago them did view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He weened well to worke some uncouth wyle:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones untwisting his deceiptfull clew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan to weave a web of wicked guyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, with faire countenance and flattring style</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To them approching, thus the knight bespake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Fayre sonne of Mars, that seeke with warlike spoyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And great atchiev’ments, great your selfe to make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vouchsafe to stay your steed for humble misers sake.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He stayd his steed for humble misers sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And badd tell on the tenor of his playnt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who feigning then in every limb to quake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through inward feare, and seeming pale and faynt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With piteous mone his percing speach gan paynt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Deare Lady! how shall I declare thy cace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom late I left in languorous constraynt?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would God! thy selfe now present were in place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tell this ruefull tale: thy sight could win thee grace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Or rather would, O! would it so had chaunst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That you, most noble Sir, had present beene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When that lewd rybauld, with vyle lust advaunst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Laid first his filthie hands on virgin cleene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To spoyle her dainty corps, so faire and sheene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As on the earth, great mother of us all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With living eye more fayre was never seene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of chastity and honour virginall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Witnes, ye heavens, whom she in vaine to help did call.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“How may it be,” sayd then the knight halfe wroth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“That knight should knighthood ever so have shent?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“None but that saw,” (quoth he) “would weene for troth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How shamefully that Mayd he did torment:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her looser golden lockes he rudely rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And drew her on the ground; and his sharpe sword</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against her snowy brest he fiercely bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And threatned death with many a bloodie word</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tounge hates to tell the rest that eye to see abhord.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith amoved from his sober mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“And lives he yet,” (said he) “that wrought this act?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doen the heavens afford him vitall food?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“He lives,” (quoth he) “and boasteth of the fact,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne yet hath any knight his courage crackt.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Where may that treachour then,” (sayd he) “be found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or by what meanes may I his footing tract?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“That shall I shew,” (sayd he) “as sure as hound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stricken Deare doth chalenge by the bleeding wound.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He stayd not lenger talke, but with fierce yre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And zealous haste away is quickly gone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke that knight, where him that crafty Squyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Supposd to be. They do arrive anone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where sate a gentle Lady all alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With garments rent, and heare discheveled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wringing her handes, and making piteous mone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her swollen eyes were much disfigured,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her faire face with teares was fowly blubbered.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The knight, approching nigh, thus to her said:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Fayre Lady, through fowle sorrow ill bedight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great pitty is to see you thus dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And marre the blossom of your beauty bright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For-thy appease your griefe and heavy plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tell the cause of your conceived payne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, if he live that hath you doen despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He shall you doe dew recompence agayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or els his wrong with greater puissance maintaine.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when she heard, as in despightfull wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She wilfully her sorrow did augment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And offred hope of comfort did despise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her golden lockes most cruelly she rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And scratcht her face with ghastly dreriment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne would she speake, ne see, ne yet be seene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But hid her visage, and her head downe bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Either for grievous shame, or for great teene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if her hart with sorrow had transfixed beene:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Till her that Squyre bespake: “Madame, my liefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Gods deare love be not so wilfull bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But doe vouchsafe now to receive reliefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which good fortune doth to you present.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For what bootes it to weepe and to wayment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When ill is chaunst, but doth the ill increase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the weake minde with double woe torment?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When she her Squyre heard speake, she gan appease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her voluntarie paine, and feele some secret ease.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoone she said; “Ah! gentle trustie Squyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What comfort can I, wofull wretch, conceave?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or why should ever I henceforth desyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see faire heavens face, and life not leave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith that false Traytour did my honour reave?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“False traytour certes,” (saide the Faerie knight)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“I read the man, that ever would deceave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A gentle Lady, or her wrong through might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death were too litle paine for such a fowle despight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But now, fayre Lady, comfort to you make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And read who hath ye wrought this shamefull plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That short revenge the man may overtake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where-so he be, and soone upon him light.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Certes,” (saide she) “I wote not how he hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But under him a gray steede he did wield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose sides with dapled circles weren dight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upright he rode, and in his silver shield</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He bore a bloodie Crosse that quartred all the field.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Now by my head,” (saide Guyon) “much I muse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How that same knight should doe so fowle amis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ever gentle Damzell so abuse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, may I boldly say, he surely is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A right good knight, and trew of word ywis:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I present was, and can it witnesse well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When armes he swore, and streight did enterpris</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th’adventure of the Errant damozell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which he hath great glory wonne, as I heare tell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Nathlesse he shortly shall againe be tryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fairely quit him of th’imputed blame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Els, be ye sure, he dearely shall abyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or make you good amendment for the same:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All wrongs have mendes, but no amendes of shame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now therefore, Lady, rise out of your paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And see the salving of your blotted name.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full loth she seemd thereto, but yet did faine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For she was inly glad her purpose so to gaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her purpose was not such as she did faine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne yet her person such as it was seene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But under simple shew, and semblant plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lurkt false Duessa secretly unseene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As a chaste Virgin that had wronged beene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So had false Archimago her disguysd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To cloke her guile with sorrow and sad teene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke himselfe had craftily devisd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be her Squire, and do her service well aguisd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her, late forlorne and naked, he had found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where she did wander in waste wildernesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lurking in rockes and caves far under ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with greene mosse cov’ring her nakednesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hide her shame and loathly filthinesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith her Prince Arthur of proud ornaments</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And borrowd beauty spoyld. Her nathelesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th’enchaunter finding fit for his intents</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did thus revest, and deckt with dew habiliments.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For all he did was to deceive good knights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And draw them from pursuit of praise and fame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To slug in slouth and sensuall delights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And end their daies with irrenowmed shame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now exceeding griefe him overcame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see the Redcrosse thus advaunced hye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore this craftie engine he did frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against his praise to stirre up enmitye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of such, as vertues like mote unto him allye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So now he Guyon guydes an uncouth way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through woods and mountaines, till they came at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into a pleasant dale that lowly lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Betwixt two hils, whose high heads overplast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The valley did with coole shade overcast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through midst thereof a little river rold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which there sate a knight with helme unlaste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himselfe refreshing with the liquid cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After his travell long and labours manifold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Lo! yonder he,” cryde Archimage alowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“That wrought the shamefull fact which I did shew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now he doth himselfe in secret shrowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To fly the vengeaunce for his outrage dew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But vaine; for ye shall dearely do him rew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So God ye speed and send you good successe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which we far off will here abide to vew.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So they him left inflam’d with wrathfulnesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That streight against that knight his speare he did addresse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who, seeing him from far so fierce to pricke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His warlike armes about him gan embrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the rest his ready speare did sticke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, when as still he saw him towards pace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan rencounter him in equall race.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They bene ymett, both ready to affrap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When suddeinly that warriour gan abace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His threatned speare, as if some new mishap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had him betide, or hidden danger did entrap;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And cryde, “Mercie, Sir knight! and mercie, Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For mine offence and heedelesse hardiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That had almost committed crime abhord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with reprochfull shame mine honour shent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles cursed steele against that badge I bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sacred badge of my Redeemers death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which on your shield is set for ornament!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But his fierce foe his steed could stay uneath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, prickt with courage kene, did cruell battell breath.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, when he heard him speake, streight way he knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His errour; and, himselfe inclyning, sayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Ah! deare Sir Guyon, well becommeth you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But me behoveth rather to upbrayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose hastie hand so far from reason strayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That almost it did haynous violence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On that fayre ymage of that heavenly Mayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That decks and armes your shield with faire defence:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your court’sie takes on you anothers dew offence.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So beene they both at one, and doen upreare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their bevers bright each other for to greet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Goodly comportaunce each to other beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And entertaine themselves with court’sies meet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then said the Redcrosse knight; “Now mote I weet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir Guyon, why with so fierce saliaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fell intent, ye did at earst me meet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For sith I know your goodly governaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great cause, I weene, you guided, or some uncouth chaunce.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Certes,” (said he) “well mote I shame to tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fond encheason that me hither led.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A false infamous faitour late befell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me for to meet, that seemed ill bested,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And playnd of grievous outrage, which he red</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A knight had wrought against a Ladie gent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to avenge he to this place me led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where you he made the marke of his intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now is fled: foule shame him follow wher he went!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So can he turne his earnest unto game,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through goodly handling and wise temperaunce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By this his aged Guide in presence came;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, soone as on that knight his eye did glaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones of him had perfect cognizaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith him in Faery court he late avizd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sayd; “Fayre sonne, God give you happy chaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that deare Crosse uppon your shield devizd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherewith above all knights ye goodly seeme aguizd!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Joy may you have, and everlasting fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of late most hard atchiev’ment by you donne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which enrolled is your glorious name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In heavenly Regesters above the Sunne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where you a Saint with Saints your seat have wonne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wretched we, where ye have left your marke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Must now anew begin like race to ronne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">God guide thee, Guyon, well to end thy warke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the wished haven bring thy weary barke!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Palmer,” him answered the Redcrosse knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“His be the praise that this atchiev’ment wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who made my hand the organ of his might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More then goodwill to me attribute nought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all I did, I did but as I ought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But you, faire Sir, whose pageant next ensewes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well mote yee thee, as well can wish your thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That home ye may report thrise happy newes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For well ye worthy bene for worth and gentle thewes.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So courteous conge both did give and take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With right hands plighted, pledges of good will.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Guyon forward gan his voyage make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his blacke Palmer, that him guided still:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still he him guided over dale and hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his steedy staffe did point his way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His race with reason, and with words his will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From fowle intemperaunce he ofte did stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And suffred not in wrath his hasty steps to stray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In this faire wize they traveild long yfere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through many hard assayes which did betide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which he honour still away did beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And spred his glory through all countryes wide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last, as chaunst them by a forest side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To passe, for succour from the scorching ray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They heard a ruefull voice, that dearnly cride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With percing shriekes and many a dolefull lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which to attend awhile their forward steps they stay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But if that carelesse hevens,” (quoth she) “despise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The doome of just revenge, and take delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see sad pageaunts of mens miseries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As bownd by them to live in lives despight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet can they not warne death from wretched wight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Come, then; come soone; come sweetest death, to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And take away this long lent loathed light:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sharpe be thy wounds, but sweete the medicines be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That long captived soules from weary thraldome free.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But thou, sweete Babe, whom frowning froward fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath made sad witnesse of thy fathers fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith heven thee deignes to hold in living state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long maist thou live, and better thrive withall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then to thy lucklesse parents did befall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Live thou; and to thy mother dead attest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That cleare she dide from blemish criminall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy litle hands embrewd in bleeding brest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loe! I for pledges leave. So give me leave to rest.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that a deadly shrieke she forth did throw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That through the wood re-echoed againe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after gave a grone so deepe and low</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemd her tender heart was rent in twaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or thrild with point of thorough-piercing paine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As gentle Hynd, whose sides with cruell steele</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through launched, forth her bleeding life does raine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles the sad pang approching shee does feele,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Braies out her latest breath, and up her eies doth seele.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when that warriour heard, dismounting straict</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From his tall steed, he rusht into the thick,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soone arrived where that sad pourtraict</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of death and dolour lay, halfe dead, halfe quick;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In whose white alabaster brest did stick</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A cruell knife that made a griesly wownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From which forth gusht a stream of gore blood thick,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all her goodly garments staind arownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And into a deepe sanguine dide the grassy grownd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Pitifull spectacle of deadly smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beside a bubling fountaine low she lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which shee increased with her bleeding hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the cleane waves with purple gore did ray:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Als in her lap a lovely babe did play</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His cruell sport, in stead of sorrow dew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For in her streaming blood he did embay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His litle hands, and tender joints embrew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pitifull spectacle, as ever eie did vew!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Besides them both, upon the soiled gras</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dead corse of an armed knight was spred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose armour all with blood besprincled was;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His ruddy lips did smyle, and rosy red</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did paint his chearefull cheekes, yett being ded;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seemd to have beene a goodly personage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now in his freshest flowre of lusty-hed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fitt to inflame faire Lady with loves rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that fiers fate did crop the blossome of his age.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when the good Sir Guyon did behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His hart gan wexe as starke as marble stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his fresh blood did frieze with fearefull cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all his sences seemd berefte attone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last his mighty ghost gan deepe to grone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Lion, grudging in his great disdaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mournes inwardly, and makes to him selfe mone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Til ruth and fraile affection did constraine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His stout courage to stoupe, and shew his inward paine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Out of her gored wound the cruell steel</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He lightly snatcht, and did the floodgate stop</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his faire garment; then gan softly feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her feeble pulse, to prove if any drop</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of living blood yet in her veynes did hop:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when he felt to move, he hoped faire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To call backe life to her forsaken shop.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So well he did her deadly wounds repaire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That at the last shee gan to breath out living aire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which he perceiving greatly gan rejoice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And goodly counsell, that for wounded hart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is meetest med’cine, tempred with sweete voice:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Ay me! deare Lady, which the ymage art</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of ruefull pitty and impatient smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What direfull chaunce, armd with avenging fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or cursed hand, hath plaid this cruell part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus fowle to hasten your untimely date?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speake, O dear Lady, speake! help never comes too late.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith her dim eie-lids she up gan reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which the drery death did sitt as sad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As lump of lead, and made darke clouds appeare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when as him, all in bright armour clad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before her standing she espied had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one out of a deadly dreame affright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She weakely started, yet she nothing drad:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Streight downe againe herselfe, in great despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She groveling threw to ground, as hating life and light.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The gentle knight her soone with carefull paine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uplifted light, and softly did uphold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrise he her reard, and thrise she sunck againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till he his armes about her sides gan fold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to her said: “Yet, if the stony cold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have not all seized on your frozen hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let one word fall that may your grief unfold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tell the secrete of your mortall smart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He oft finds present helpe who does his griefe impart.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then, casting up a deadly looke, full low</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee sight from bottome of her wounded brest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after, many bitter throbs did throw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With lips full pale and foltring tong opprest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These words she breathed forth from riven chest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Leave, ah! leave off, whatever wight thou bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To lett a weary wretch from her dew rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And trouble dying soules tranquilitee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take not away, now got, which none would give to me.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ah! far be it,” (said he) “Deare dame, fro mee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hinder soule from her desired rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or hold sad life in long captivitee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all I seeke is but to have redrest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bitter pangs that doth your heart infest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tell then, O Lady! tell what fatall priefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath with so huge misfortune you opprest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I may cast to compas your reliefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or die with you in sorrow, and partake your griefe.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With feeble hands then stretched forth on hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As heven accusing guilty of her death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with dry drops congealed in her eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In these sad wordes she spent her utmost breath:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Heare then, O man! the sorrowes that uneath</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My tong can tell, so far all sence they pas.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Loe! this dead corpse, that lies here underneath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gentlest knight, that ever on greene gras</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gay steed with spurs did pricke, the good Sir Mortdant was:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Was, (ay the while, that he is not so now!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Lord, my love, my deare Lord, my deare love!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So long as hevens just with equall brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vouchsafed to behold us from above.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One day, when him high corage did emmove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As wont ye knightes to seeke adventures wilde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He pricked forth his puissant force to prove.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me then he left enwombed of this childe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This luckles childe, whom thus ye see with blood defild.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Him fortuned (hard fortune ye may ghesse)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To come, where vile Acrasia does wonne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Acrasia, a false enchaunteresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That many errant knightes hath fowle fordonne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within a wandring Island, that doth ronne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stray in perilous gulfe, her dwelling is.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayre Sir, if ever there ye travell, shonne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cursed land where many wend amis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And know it by the name: it hight the <em>Bowre of blis</em>.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Her blis is all in pleasure, and delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith she makes her lovers dronken mad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then with words, and weedes, of wondrous might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On them she workes her will to uses bad:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My liefest Lord she thus beguiled had;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he was flesh: (all flesh doth frayltie breed)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when I heard to beene so ill bestad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weake wretch, I wrapt myselfe in Palmers weed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cast to seek him forth through danger and great dreed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Now had fayre Cynthia by even tournes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full measured three quarters of her yeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thrise three tymes had fild her crooked hornes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whenas my wombe her burdein would forbeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bad me call Lucina to me neare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lucina came; a manchild forth I brought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The woods, the nymphes, my bowres, my midwives, weare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hard help at need! So deare thee, babe, I bought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet nought too dear I deemd, while so my deare I sought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Him so I sought; and so at last I fownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where him that witch had thralled to her will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In chaines of lust and lewde desyres ybownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so transformed from his former skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That me he knew not, nether his owne ill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till, through wise handling and faire governaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I him recured to a better will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Purged from drugs of fowle intemperaunce:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then meanes I gan devise for his deliveraunce.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Which when the vile Enchaunteresse perceiv’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How that my Lord from her I would reprive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With cup thus charmd him parting she deceivd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">‘<em>Sad verse, give death to him that death does give,</em></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">
						<em>And losse of love to her that loves to live,</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><em>So soone as Bacchus with the Nymphe does lincke!</em>’</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So parted we, and on our journey drive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till, coming to this well, he stoupt to drincke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The charme fulfild, dead suddeinly he downe did sincke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Which when I, wretch”⁠—Not one word more she sayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But breaking off the end for want of breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And slyding soft, as downe to sleepe her layd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ended all her woe in quiet death.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seeing, good Sir Guyon could uneath</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From teares abstayne; for griefe his hart did grate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from so heavie sight his head did wreath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Accusing fortune, and too cruell fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which plonged had faire Lady in so wretched state.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then turning to his Palmer said; “Old syre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behold the ymage of mortalitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And feeble nature cloth’d with fleshly tyre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When raging passion with fierce tyranny</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Robs reason of her dew regalitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And makes it servaunt to her basest part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The strong it weakens with infirmitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with bold furie armes the weakest hart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The strong through pleasure soonest falles, the weake through smart.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But temperaunce” (said he) “with golden squire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Betwixt them both can measure out a meane;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nether to melt in pleasures whott desyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor frye in hartlesse griefe and dolefull tene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrise happy man, who fares them both atweene!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But sith this wretched woman overcome</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of anguish, rather then of crime, hath bene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Reserve her cause to her eternall doome;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, in the meane, vouchsafe her honorable toombe.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Palmer,” quoth he, “death is an equall doome</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To good and bad, the common In of rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But after death the tryall is to come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When best shall bee to them that lived best;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But both alike, when death hath both supprest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Religious reverence doth buriall teene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which whoso wants, wants so much of his rest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all so great shame after death I weene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As selfe to dyen bad, unburied bad to beene.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So both agree their bodies to engrave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The great earthes wombe they open to the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with sad Cypresse seemely it embrave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, covering with a clod their closed eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They lay therein their corses tenderly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bid them sleepe in everlasting peace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, ere they did their utmost obsequy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir Guyon, more affection to increace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bynempt a sacred vow, which none should ay releace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The dead knights sword out of his sheath he drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which he cutt a lock of all their heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which medling with their blood and earth he threw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the grave, and gan devoutly sweare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Such and such evil God on Guyon reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And worse and worse, young Orphane, be thy payne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If I, or thou, dew vengeaunce doe forbeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till guiltie blood her guerdon doe obtayne!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So shedding many teares they closd the earth agayne.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Babes bloudie handes may not be clensd:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The face of golden Meane</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her sisters, two Extremities,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Strive her to banish cleane.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thus when Sir Guyon with his faithful guyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had with dew rites and dolorous lament</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The end of their sad Tragedie uptyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The litle babe up in his armes he hent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who with sweet pleasaunce, and bold blandishment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan smyle on them, that rather ought to weepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As carelesse of his woe, or innocent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that was doen; that ruth emperced deepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In that knightes hart, and wordes with bitter teares did steepe:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ah! lucklesse babe, borne under cruell starre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in dead parents balefull ashes bred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full little weenest thou what sorrowes are</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Left thee for porcion of thy livelyhed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Poore Orphane! in the wild world scattered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As budding braunch rent from the native tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And throwen forth, till it be withered.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such is the state of men: Thus enter we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into this life with woe, and end with miseree!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then, soft himselfe inclyning on his knee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Downe to that well, did in the water weene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(So love does loath disdainefull nicitee)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His guiltie handes from bloody gore to cleene.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He washt them oft and oft, yet nought they beene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all his washing cleaner. Still he strove;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet still the litle hands were bloody seene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which him into great amaz’ment drove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And into diverse doubt his wavering wonder clove.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He wist not whether blott of fowle offence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might not be purgd with water nor with bath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that high God, in lieu of innocence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Imprinted had that token of his wrath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To shew how sore bloodguiltinesse he hat’th;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that the charme and veneme which they dronck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their blood with secret filth infected hath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being diffused through the senceless tronck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That through the great contagion direful deadly stonck.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom thus at gaze the Palmer gan to bord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With goodly reason, and thus fayre bespake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Ye bene right hard amated, gratious Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of your ignorance great merveill make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles cause not well conceived ye mistake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But know, that secret vertues are infusd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In every fountaine, and in everie lake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which who hath skill them rightly to have chusd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To proofe of passing wonders hath full often usd:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Of those, some were so from their sourse indewd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By great Dame Nature, from whose fruitfull pap</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their welheads spring, and are with moisture deawd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which feedes each living plant with liquid sap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And filles with flowres fayre Floraes painted lap:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But other some, by guifte of later grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or by good prayers, or by other hap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had vertue pourd into their waters bace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thenceforth were renowmd, and sought from place to place.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Such is this well, wrought by occasion straunge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to her Nymph befell. Upon a day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As she the woodes with bow and shaftes did raunge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hartlesse Hynd and Robucke to dismay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dan Faunus chaunst to meet her by the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, kindling fire at her faire-burning eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Inflamed was to follow beauties pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chaced her that fast from him did fly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As hynd from her, so she fled from her enimy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“At last, when fayling breath began to faint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saw no meanes to scape, of shame affrayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She set her downe to weepe for sore constraint;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to Diana calling lowd for ayde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her deare besought to let her die a mayd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The goddesse heard; and suddeine, where she sate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Welling out streames of teares, and quite dismayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With stony teare of that rude rustick mate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Transformd her to a stone from stedfast virgins state.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Lo! now she is that stone; from whose two heads,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As from two weeping eyes, fresh streames do flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet colde through feare and old conceived dreads;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet the stone her semblance seemes to show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shapt like a maide, that such ye may her know:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet her vertues in her water byde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For it is chaste and pure as purest snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne lets her waves with any filth be dyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ever, like herselfe, unstayned hath beene tryde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“From thence it comes, that this babes bloody hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May not be clensd with water of this well:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne certes, Sir, strive you it to withstand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But let them still be bloody, as befell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they his mothers innocence may tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As she bequeathd in her last testament;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, as a sacred Symbole, it may dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In her sonnes flesh, to mind revengement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And be for all chaste Dames an endlesse moniment.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He hearkned to his reason, and the childe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uptaking, to the Palmer gave to beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But his sad fathers armes with blood defilde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An heavie load, himselfe did lightly reare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And turning to that place, in which whyleare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He left his loftie steed with golden sell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And goodly gorgeous barbes, him found not theare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By other accident, that earst befell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He is convaide; but how, or where, here fits not tell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when Sir Guyon saw, all were he wroth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet algates mote he soft himselfe appease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fairely fare on foot, how ever loth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His double burden did him sore disease.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So long they traveiled with litle ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that at last they to a Castle came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Built on a rocke adjoyning to the seas:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It was an auncient worke of antique fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wondrous strong by nature, and by skilfull frame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therein three sisters dwelt of sundry sort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The children of one syre by mothers three;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who dying whylome did divide this fort</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To them by equall shares in equall fee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But stryfull mind and diverse qualitee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drew them in partes, and each made others foe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still did they strive and daily disagree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The eldest did against the youngest goe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And both against the middest meant to worken woe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Where when the knight arriv’d, he was right well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Receiv’d, as knight of so much worth became,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of second sister, who did far excell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other two: Medina was her name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A sober sad and comely courteous Dame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who rich arayd, and yet in modest guize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In goodly garments that her well became,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayre marching forth in honorable wize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him at the threshold mett, and well did enterprize.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She led him up into a goodly bowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And comely, courted with meet modestie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne in her speach, ne in her haviour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was lightnesse seene or looser vanitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But gratious womanhood, and gravitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above the reason of her youthly yeares.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her golden lockes she roundly did uptye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In breaded tramels, that no looser heares</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did out of order stray about her daintie eares.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whilest she her selfe thus busily did frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seemely to entertaine her new-come guest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Newes hereof to her other sisters came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who all this while were at their wanton rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Accourting each her frend with lavish fest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They were two knights of perelesse puissaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And famous far abroad for warlike gest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to these Ladies love did countenaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to his mistresse each himselfe strove to advaunce.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He that made love unto the eldest Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was hight Sir Huddibras, an hardy man;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet not so good of deedes as great of name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he by many rash adventures wan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since errant armes to sew he first began:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More huge in strength then wise in workes he was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And reason with foole-hardize over ran;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sterne melancholy did his courage pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And was, for terrour more, all armd in shyning bras.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But he that lov’d the youngest was <span xml:lang="fr">Sansloy</span>;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He, that faire Una late fowle outraged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The most unruly and the boldest boy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ever warlike weapons menaged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all to lawlesse lust encouraged</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through strong opinion of his matchlesse might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought he car’d whom he endamaged</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By tortious wrong, or whom bereav’d of right:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He, now this Ladies Champion, chose for love to fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>These two gay knights, vowd to so diverse loves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each other does envy with deadly hate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And daily warre against his foeman moves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hope to win more favour with his mate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And th’others pleasing service to abate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To magnifie his owne. But when they heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How in that place straunge knight arrived late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both knightes and ladies forth right angry far’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fercely unto battell sterne themselves prepar’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, ere they could proceede unto the place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where he abode, themselves at discord fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cruell combat joynd in middle space:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With horrible assault, and fury fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They heapt huge strokes the scorned life to quell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all on uprore from her settled seat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The house was raysd, and all that in did dwell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seemd that lowde thunder with amazement great</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did rend the ratling skyes with flames of fouldring heat.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The noyse thereof cal’d forth that straunger knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet what dreadfull thing was there in hond;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where whenas two brave knightes in bloody fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With deadly rancour he enraunged fond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His sunbroad shield about his wrest he bond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shyning blade unsheathd, with which he ran</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto that stead, their strife to understond;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at his first arrivall them began</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With goodly meanes to pacifie, well as he can.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But they, him spying, both with greedy forse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Attonce upon him ran, and him beset</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With strokes of mortall steele without remorse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on his shield like yron sledges bet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As when a Beare and Tygre, being met</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In cruell fight on Lybicke Ocean wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Espye a traveiler with feet surbet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom they in equall pray hope to divide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They stint their strife and him assayle on everie side.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But he, not like a weary traveilere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their sharp assault right boldly did rebut,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And suffred not their blowes to byte him nere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with redoubled buffes them backe did put:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose grieved mindes, which choler did englut,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against themselves turning their wrathfull spight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan with new rage their shieldes to hew and cut;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But still, when Guyon came to part their fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With heavie load on him they freshly gan to smight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As a tall ship tossed in troublous seas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom raging windes, threatning to make the pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the rough rockes, doe diversly disease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Meetes two contrarie billowes by the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her on either side doe sore assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And boast to swallow her in greedy grave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee, scorning both their spights, does make wide way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with her brest breaking the fomy wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Does ride on both their backs, and faire her self doth save.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So boldly he him beares, and rusheth forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Betweene them both by conduct of his blade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wondrous great prowesse and heroick worth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He shewd that day, and rare ensample made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When two so mighty warriours he dismade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Attonce he wards and strikes; he takes and paies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now forst to yield, now forcing to invade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before, behind, and round about him laies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So double was his paines, so double be his praise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Straunge sort of fight, three valiaunt knights to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Three combates joine in one, and to darraine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A triple warre with triple enmitee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All for their Ladies froward love to gaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which gotten was but hate. So love does raine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In stoutest minds, and maketh monstrous warre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He maketh warre, he maketh peace againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yett his peace is but continual jarre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O miserable men, that to him subject arre!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whilst thus they mingled were in furious armes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The faire Medina, with her tresses torne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And naked brest, in pitty of their harmes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emongst them ran; and, falling them beforne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besought them by the womb which them had born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by the loves which were to them most deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by the knighthood which they sure had sworn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their deadly cruell discord to forbeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to her just conditions of faire peace to heare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But her two other sisters, standing by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her lowd gainsaid, and both their champions bad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pursew the end of their strong enmity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As ever of their loves they would be glad.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet she with pitthy words, and counsell sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still strove their stubborne rages to revoke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That at the last, suppressing fury mad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They gan abstaine from dint of direfull stroke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hearken to the sober speaches which she spoke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ah, puissaunt Lords! what cursed evil Spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or fell Erinnys, in your noble harts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her hellish brond hath kindled with despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stird you up to worke your wilfull smarts?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is this the joy of armes? be these the parts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of glorious knighthood, after blood to thrust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And not regard dew right and just desarts?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vaine is the vaunt, and victory unjust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That more to mighty hands then rightfull cause doth trust.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And were there rightfull cause of difference,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet were not better fayre it to accord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then with bloodguiltinesse to heape offence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mortal vengeaunce joyne to crime abhord?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O! fly from wrath; fly, O my liefest Lord!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sad be the sights, and bitter fruites of warre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thousand furies wait on wrathfull sword;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought the praise of prowesse more doth marre</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then fowle revenging rage, and base contentious jarre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But lovely concord, and most sacred peace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth nourish vertue, and fast friendship breeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weake she makes strong, and strong thing does increace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till it the pitch of highest praise exceeds:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Brave be her warres, and honorable deeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which she triumphes over yre and pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And winnes an Olive girlond for her meeds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be, therefore, O my deare Lords! pacifide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this misseeming discord meekely lay aside.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her gracious words their rancour did appall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And suncke so deepe into their boyling brests,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That downe they lett their cruell weapons fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lowly did abase their lofty crests</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To her faire presence and discrete behests.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then she began a treaty to procure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stablish terms betwixt both their requests,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That as a law for ever should endure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which to observe in word of knights they did assure.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which to confirme, and fast to bind their league,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After their weary sweat and bloody toile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She them besought, during their quiet treague,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into her lodging to repaire awhile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To rest themselves, and grace to reconcile.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They soone consent: so forth with her they fare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where they are well receivd, and made to spoile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Themselves of soiled armes, and to prepare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their minds to pleasure, and their mouths to dainty fare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And those two froward sisters, their faire loves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came with them eke, all were they wondrous loth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fained cheare, as for the time behoves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But could not colour yet so well the troth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that their natures bad appeard in both;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For both did at their second sister grutch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And inly grieve, as doth an hidden moth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The inner garment frett, not th’utter touch:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One thought her cheare too litle, th’other thought too mutch.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Elissa (so the eldest hight) did deeme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such entertainment base, ne ought would eat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought would speake, but evermore did seeme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As discontent for want of merth or meat:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No solace could her Paramour intreat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her once to show, ne court, nor dalliaunce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with bent lowring browes, as she would threat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She scould, and frownd with froward countenaunce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unworthy of faire Ladies comely governaunce.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But young Perissa was of other mynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of disport, still laughing, loosely light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And quite contrary to her sisters kynd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No measure in her mood, no rule of right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But poured out in pleasure and delight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In wine and meats she flowd above the banck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in excesse exceeded her owne might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In sumptuous tire she joyd her selfe to pranck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But of her love too lavish: (litle have she thanck!)</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Fast by her side did sitt the bold <span xml:lang="fr">Sansloy</span>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fitt mate for such a mincing mineon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who in her loosenesse tooke exceeding joy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might not be found a francker franion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her leawd parts to make companion:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Huddibras, more like a Malecontent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did see and grieve at his bold fashion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hardly could he endure his hardiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yett still he satt, and inly did him selfe torment.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Betwixt them both the faire Medina sate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sober grace and goodly carriage:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With equall measure she did moderate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The strong extremities of their outrage.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That forward paire she ever would asswage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When they would strive dew reason to exceed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that same froward twaine would accorage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of her plenty adde unto their need:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So kept she them in order, and her selfe in heed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus fairely shee attempered her feast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pleas’d them all with meete satiety.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last, when lust of meat and drinke was ceast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She Guyon deare besought of curtesie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tell from whence he came through jeopardy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And whither now on new adventure bownd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who with bold grace, and comely gravity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drawing to him the eies of all arownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From lofty siege began these words aloud to sownd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“This thy demaund, O Lady! doth revive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fresh memory in me of that great Queene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great and most glorious virgin Queene alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with her soveraine power, and scepter shene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All Faery lond does peaceably sustene.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In widest Ocean she her throne does reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That over all the earth it may be seene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As morning Sunne her beames dispredden cleare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in her face faire peace and mercy doth appeare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In her the richesse of all heavenly grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In chiefe degree are heaped up on hye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all, that els this worlds enclosure bace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath great or glorious in mortall eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adornes the person of her Majestye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That men, beholding so great excellence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rare perfection in mortalitye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe her adore with sacred reverence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As th’Idole of her makers great magnificence.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“To her I homage and my service owe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In number of the noblest knightes on ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst whom on me she deigned to bestowe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Order of Maydenhead, the most renownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That may this day in all the world be found.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An yearely solemne feast she wontes to hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The day that first doth lead the yeare around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which all knights of worth and courage bold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Resort, to heare of straunge adventures to be told.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“There this old Palmer shewd himselfe that day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to that mighty Princesse did complaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of grievous mischiefes which a wicked Fay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had wrought, and many whelmd in deadly paine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof he crav’d redresse. My Soveraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose glory is in gracious deeds, and joyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throughout the world her mercy to maintaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones devisd redresse for such annoyes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me, all unfitt for so great purpose, she employes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Now hath faire Phebe with her silver face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrise seene the shadowes of the neather world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith last I left that honorable place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which her roiall presence is enrold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever shall I rest in house nor hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till I that false Acrasia have wonne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whose fowle deedes, too hideous to bee told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I witnesse am, and this their wretched sonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose wofull parents she hath wickedly fordonne.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Tell on, fayre Sir,” said she, “that dolefull tale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From which sad ruth does seeme you to restraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That we may pitty such unhappie bale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And learne from pleasures poyson to abstaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ill by ensample good doth often gayne.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then forward he his purpose gan pursew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And told the story of the mortall payne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Mordant and Amavia did rew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As with lamenting eyes him selfe did lately vew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Night was far spent; and now in Ocean deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Orion, flying fast from hissing snake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His flaming head did hasten for to steep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When of his pitteous tale he end did make:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilst with delight of that he wisely spake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those guestes, beguyled, did beguyle their eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of kindly sleepe that did them overtake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last, when they had markt the chaunged skyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They wist their houre was spent; then each to rest him hyes.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-3" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Vaine Braggadocchio getting Guyons</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Horse, is made the scorne</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of knighthood trew, and is of fayre</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Belphoebe fowle forlorne.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as the morrow fayre with purple beames</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disperst the shadowes of the misty night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Titan, playing on the eastern streames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan cleare the deawy ayre with springing light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir Guyon, mindfull of his vow yplight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uprose from drowsie couch, and him addrest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the journey which he had behight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His puissant armes about his noble brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many-folded shield he bound about his wrest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then, taking Congé of that virgin pure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bloody-handed babe unto her truth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did earnestly committ, and her conjure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In vertuous lore to traine his tender youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all that gentle noriture ensu’th;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that, so soone as ryper yeares he raught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He might, for memory of that dayes ruth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be called Ruddymane; and thereby taught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>T’avenge his Parents death on them that had it wrought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So forth he far’d, as now befell, on foot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith his good steed is lately from him gone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Patience perforce: helplesse what may it boot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To frett for anger, or for griefe to mone?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His Palmer now shall foot no more alone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So fortune wrought, as under greene woodes syde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He lately heard that dying Lady grone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He left his steed without, and speare besyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rushed in on foot to ayd her ere she dyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The whyles a losell wandring by the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One that to bountie never cast his mynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne thought of honour ever did assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His baser brest, but in his kestrell kynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A pleasing vaine of glory he did fynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which his flowing toung and troublous spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gave him great ayd, and made him more inclynd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He, that brave steed there finding ready dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Purloynd both steed and speare, and ran away full light.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now gan his hart all swell in jollity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of him selfe great hope and help conceiv’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That puffed up with smoke of vanity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with selfe-loved personage deceiv’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan to hope of men to be receiv’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For such as he him thought, or faine would bee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But for in court gay portaunce he perceiv’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gallant shew to be in greatest gree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eftsoones to court he cast t’advaunce his first degree.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And by the way he chaunced to espy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One sitting ydle on a sunny banck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To him avaunting in great bravery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Peacocke that his painted plumes doth pranck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He smote his courser in the trembling flanck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to him threatned his hart-thrilling speare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The seely man, seeing him ryde so ranck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ayme at him, fell flatt to ground for feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And crying, “Mercy!” loud, his pitious handes gan reare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereat the Scarcrow wexed wondrous prowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through fortune of his first adventure fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with big thundring voice revyld him lowd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Vile Caytive, vassall of dread and despayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unworthie of the commune breathed ayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why livest thou, dead dog, a lenger day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doest not unto death thyselfe prepayre?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dy, or thyselfe my captive yield for ay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great favour I thee graunt for aunswere thus to stay.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Hold, O deare Lord! hold your dead-doing hand,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then loud he cryde; “I am your humble thrall.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Ay wretch,” (quoth he) “thy destinies withstand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My wrathfull will, and doe for mercy call.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I give thee life: therefore prostrated fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And kisse my stirrup; that thy homage bee.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Miser threw him selfe, as an Offall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Streight at his foot in base humilitee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cleeped him his liege, to hold of him in fee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So happy peace they made and faire accord.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones this liegeman gan to wexe more bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when he felt the folly of his Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his owne kind he gan him selfe unfold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he was wylie witted, and growne old</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In cunning sleightes and practick knavery.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From that day forth he cast for to uphold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His ydle humour with fine flattery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And blow the bellowes to his swelling vanity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Trompart, fitt man for Braggadochio,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To serve at court in view of vaunting eye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vaine-glorious man, when fluttring wind does blow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his light winges, is lifted up to skye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The scorne of knighthood and trew chevalrye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To thinke, without desert of gentle deed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And noble worth, to be advaunced hye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such prayse is shame; but honour, vertues meed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth beare the fayrest flowre in honourable seed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So forth they pas, a well consorted payre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that at length with Archimage they meet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who seeing one, that shone in armour fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On goodly courser thondring with his feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones supposed him a person meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his revenge to make the instrument;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For since the Redcrosse knight he erst did weet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To been with Guyon knitt in one consent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ill, which earst to him, he now to Guyon ment.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And coming close to Trompart gan inquere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of him, what mightie warriour that mote bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That rode in golden sell with single spere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wanted sword to wreake his enmitee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“He is a great adventurer,” (said he)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“That hath his sword through hard assay forgone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now hath vowd, till he avenged bee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that despight, never to wearen none:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That speare is him enough to doen a thousand grone.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Th’enchaunter greatly joyed in the vaunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And weened well ere long his will to win,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both his foen with equall foyle to daunt.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho to him louting lowly did begin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To plaine of wronges, which had committed bin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By Guyon, and by that false Redcrosse knight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which two, through treason and deceiptfull gin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had slayne Sir Mordant and his Lady bright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That mote him honour win to wreak so foule despight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith all suddeinly he seemd enraged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And threatned death with dreadfull countenaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if their lives had in his hand beene gaged;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with stiffe force shaking his mortall launce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To let him weet his doughtie valiaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus said: “Old man, great sure shal be thy meed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If, where those knights for feare of dew vengeaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe lurke, thou certainly to mee areed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I may wreake on them their hainous hatefull deed.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Certes, my Lord,” (said he) “that shall I soone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And give you eke good helpe to their decay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But mote I wisely you advise to doon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Give no ods to your foes, but doe purvay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your selfe of sword before that bloody day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For they be two the prowest knights on grownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oft approv’d in many hard assay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke of surest steele that may be fownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do arme your self against that day, them to confownd.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Dotard,” (said he) “let be thy deepe advise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seemes that through many yeares thy wits thee faile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that weake eld hath left thee nothing wise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Els never should thy judgement be so frayle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To measure manhood by the sword or mayle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is not enough fowre quarters of a man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withouten sword or shield, an hoste to quayle?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou litle wotest what this right-hand can:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speake they which have beheld the battailes which it wan.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The man was much abashed at his boast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet well he wist that whoso would contend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With either of those knightes on even coast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should neede of all his armes him to defend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet feared least his boldnesse should offend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When Braggadocchio saide; “Once I did sweare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When with one sword seven knightes I brought to end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thenceforth in battaile never sword to beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But it were that which noblest knight on earth doth weare.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Perdy, Sir knight,” saide then th’enchaunter blive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“That shall I shortly purchase to your hond;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For now the best and noblest knight alive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Prince Arthur is, that wonnes in Faerie lond:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He hath a sword that flames like burning brond.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The same by my device I undertake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall by to morrow by thy side be fond.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At which bold word that boaster gan to quake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wondred in his minde what mote that Monster make.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He stay’d not for more bidding, but away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was suddein vanished out of his sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Northerne winde his wings did broad display</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At his commaund, and reared him up light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From off the earth to take his aerie flight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They look’t about, but nowhere could espye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tract of his foot: then dead through great affright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They both nigh were, and each bad other flye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both fled attonce, ne ever backe retourned eye;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Till that they come unto a forrest greene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which they shrowd themselves from causeles feare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet feare them followes still where so they beene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each trembling leafe and whistling wind they heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As ghastly bug, does greatly them affeare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet both doe strive their fearefulnesse to faine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last they heard a horne that shrilled cleare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throughout the wood that ecchoed againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made the forrest ring, as it would rive in twaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eft through the thicke they heard one rudely rush,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With noyse whereof he from his loftie steed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Downe fell to ground, and crept into a bush,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hide his coward head from dying dreed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Trompart stoutly stayd to taken heed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of what might hap. Eftsoone there stepped foorth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A goodly Ladie clad in hunters weed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemd to be a woman of great worth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by her stately portance borne of heavenly birth.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her face so faire as flesh it seemed not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But hevenly pourtraict of bright Angels hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cleare as the skye, withouten blame or blot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through goodly mixture of complexions dew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in her cheekes the vermeill red did shew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like roses in a bed of lillies shed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which ambrosiall odours from them threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gazers sence with double pleasure fed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hable to heale the sicke, and to revive the ded.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In her faire eyes two living lamps did flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kindled above at th’hevenly makers light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And darted fyrie beames out of the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So passing persant, and so wondrous bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That quite bereav’d the rash beholders sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In them the blinded god his lustfull fyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To kindle oft assayd, but had no might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, with dredd Majestie and awfull yre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She broke his wanton darts, and quenched bace desyre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her yvorie forhead, full of bountie brave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like a broad table did it selfe dispred;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Love his loftie triumphes to engrave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And write the battailes of his great godhed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All good and honour might therein be red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For there their dwelling was. And, when she spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sweete wordes like dropping honny she did shed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And twixt the perles and rubins softly brake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A silver sound, that heavenly musicke seemd to make.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Upon her eyelids many Graces sate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under the shadow of her even browes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Working belgardes and amorous retrate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And everie one her with a grace endowes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And everie one with meekenesse to her bowes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So glorious mirrhour of celestiall grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soveraine moniment of mortall vowes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How shall frayle pen descrive her heavenly face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For feare, through want of skill, her beauty to disgrace?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So faire, and thousand thousand times more faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She seemd, when she presented was to sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And was yclad, for heat of scorching aire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All in a silken Camus lilly whight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Purfled upon with many a folded plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which all above besprinckled was throughout</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With golden aygulets, that glistred bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like twinckling starres; and all the skirt about</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was hemd with golden fringe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Below her ham her weed did somewhat trayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her streight legs most bravely were embayld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In gilden buskins of costly Cordwayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All bard with golden bendes, which were entayld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With curious antickes, and full fayre aumayld:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before, they fastned were under her knee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In a rich jewel, and therein entrayld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The ends of all the knots, that none might see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How they within their fouldings close enwrapped bee:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like two faire marble pillours they were seene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which doe the temple of the Gods support,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom all the people decke with girlands greene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And honour in their festivall resort;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those same with stately grace and princely port</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She taught to tread, when she herselfe would grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with the woody Nymphes when she did play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or when the flying Libbard she did chace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She could them nimbly move, and after fly apace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And in her hand a sharpe bore-speare she held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at her backe a bow and quiver gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stuft with steele-headed dartes, wherewith she queld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The salvage beastes in her victorious play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Knit with a golden bauldricke, which forelay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Athwart her snowy brest, and did divide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her daintie paps; which, like young fruit in May,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now little gan to swell, and being tide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through her thin weed their places only signifide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her yellow lockes, crisped like golden wyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About her shoulders weren loosely shed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, when the winde emongst them did inspyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They waved like a penon wyde dispred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And low behinde her backe were scattered:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, whether art it were or heedlesse hap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As through the flouring forrest rash she fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In her rude heares sweet flowres themselves did lap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And flourishing fresh leaves and blossoms did enwrap.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such as Diana by the sandy shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of swift Eurotas, or on Cynthus greene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where all the Nymphes have her unwares forlore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wandreth alone with bow and arrowes keene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke her game: Or as that famous Queene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Amazons, whom Pyrrhus did destroy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The day that first of Priame she was seene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did shew her selfe in great triumphant joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To succour the weake state of sad afflicted Troy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such when as hartlesse Trompart her did vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He was dismayed in his coward minde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doubted whether he himselfe should shew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or fly away, or bide alone behinde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both feare and hope he in her face did finde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When she at last him spying thus bespake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Hayle, Groome! didst not thou see a bleeding Hynde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose right haunch earst my stedfast arrow strake?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou didst, tell me, that I may her overtake.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Wherewith reviv’d, this answere forth he threw:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“O Goddesse, (for such I thee take to bee)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For nether doth thy face terrestriall shew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor voyce sound mortall; I avow to thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such wounded beast as that I did not see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith earst into this forrest wild I came.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But mote thy goodlyhed forgive it mee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weete which of the gods I shall thee name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That unto thee dew worship I may rightly frame.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom she thus⁠—but ere her words ensewd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the bush her eye did suddein glaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which vaine Braggadocchio was mewd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saw it stirre: she lefte her percing launce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And towards gan a deadly shafte advaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In mind to marke the beast. At which sad stowre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Trompart forth stept to stay the mortall chaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out crying; “O! what ever hevenly powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or earthly wight thou be, withhold this deadly howre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O! stay thy hand; for yonder is no game</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thy fiers arrowes, them to exercize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But loe! my Lord, my liege, whose warlike name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is far renowmd through many bold emprize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now in shade he shrowded yonder lies.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She staid: with that he crauld out of his nest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth creeping on his caitive hands and thies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, standing stoutly up, his lofty crest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did fiercely shake, and rowze as comming late from rest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As fearfull fowle, that long in secret cave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For dread of soring hauke her selfe hath hid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor caring how, her silly life to save,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She her gay painted plumes disorderid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeing at last her selfe from daunger rid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Peepes forth, and soone renews her native pride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She gins her feathers fowle disfigured</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Prowdly to prune, and sett on every side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She shakes off shame, ne thinks how erst she did her hide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So when her goodly visage he beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan himselfe to vaunt: but, when he vewd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those deadly tooles which in her hand she held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone into other fitts he was transmewd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till she to him her gracious speach renewd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“All haile, Sir knight! and well may thee befall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As all the like, which honor have pursewd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through deeds of armes and prowesse martiall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All vertue merits praise, but such the most of all.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom he thus: “O fairest under skie!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Trew be thy words, and worthie of thy praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That warlike feats doest highest glorifie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therein I have spent all my youthly daies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many battailes fought and many fraies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throughout the world, wher-so they might be found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Endevoring my dreaded name to raise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above the Moone, that fame may it resound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In her eternall tromp, with laurell girlond cround.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But what art thou, O Lady! which doest raunge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In this wilde forest, where no pleasure is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doest not it for joyous court exchaunge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emongst thine equall peres, where happy blis</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all delight does raigne, much more then this?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There thou maist love, and dearly loved be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And swim in pleasure, which thou here doest mis:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There maist thou best be seene, and best maist see:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wood is fit for beasts, the court is fitt for thee.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Whoso in pompe of prowd estate” (quoth she)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Does swim, and bathes him selfe in courtly blis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Does waste his dayes in darke obscuritee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in oblivion ever buried is;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where ease abownds yt’s eath to doe amis:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But who his limbs with labours, and his mynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behaves with cares, cannot so easy mis.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abroad in armes, at home in studious kynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who seekes with painfull toile shall honor soonest find:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“In woods, in waves, in warres, she wonts to dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wil be found with perill and with paine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne can the man that moulds in ydle cell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto her happy mansion attaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before her gate high God did Sweate ordaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wakefull watches ever to abide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But easy is the way and passage plaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To pleasures pallace: it may soone be spide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And day and night her dores to all stand open wide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“In Princes court”⁠—The rest she would have sayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that the foolish man, fild with delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or her sweete words that all his sence dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with her wondrous beauty ravisht quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan burne in filthy lust; and, leaping light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thought in his bastard armes her to embrace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that she, swarving backe, her Javelin bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against him bent, and fiercely did menace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So turned her about, and fled away apace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when the Pesaunt saw, amazd he stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And grieved at her flight; yet durst he nott</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pursew her steps through wild unknowen wood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besides he feard her wrath, and threatned shott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles in the bush he lay, not yett forgott:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne car’d he greatly for her presence vayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But turning said to Trompart; “What fowle blott</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is this to knight, that Lady should agayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Depart to woods untoucht, and leave so proud disdayne.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Perdy,” (said Trompart) “lett her pas at will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least by her presence daunger mote befall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For who can tell (and sure I feare it ill)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that shee is some powre celestiall?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For whiles she spake her great words did appall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My feeble corage, and my heart oppresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That yet I quake and tremble over-all.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“And I,” (said Braggadocchio) “thought no lesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When first I heard her horn sound with such ghastlinesse,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“For from my mothers wombe this grace I have</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me given by eternall destiny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That earthly thing may not my corage brave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dismay with feare, or cause one foot to flye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But either hellish feends, or powres on hye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which was the cause, when earst that horne I heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weening it had beene thunder in the skye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I hid my selfe from it, as one affeard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, when I other knew, my self I boldly reard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But now, for feare of worse that may betide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let us soone hence depart.” They soone agree:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So to his steed he gott, and gan to ride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one unfitt therefore, that all might see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He had not trayned bene in chevalree.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which well that valiaunt courser did discerne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he despisd to tread in dew degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But chaufd and fom’d with corage fiers and sterne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to be easd of that base burden still did erne.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-4" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Guyon does Furor bind in chaines</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And stops Occasion:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Delivers Phedon, and therefore</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">By Strife is rayled upon.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In brave poursuitt of honorable deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There is I know not (what) great difference</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Betweene the vulgar and the noble seed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which unto things of valorous pretence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seemes to be borne by native influence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As feates of armes, and love to entertaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But chiefly skill to ride seemes a science</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proper to gentle blood: some others faine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To menage steeds, as did this vaunter, but in vaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But he, the rightfull owner of that steede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who well could menage and subdew his pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles on foot was forced for to yeed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that blacke Palmer, his most trusty guide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who suffred not his wandring feete to slide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when strong passion, or weake fleshlinesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would from the right way seeke to draw him wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He would, through temperaunce and stedfastnesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Teach him the weak to strengthen, and the strong suppresse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It fortuned, forth faring on his way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He saw from far, or seemed for to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some troublous uprore or contentious fray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereto he drew in hast it to agree.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A mad man, or that feigned mad to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drew by the heare along upon the grownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A handsom stripling with great crueltee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom sore he bett, and gor’d with many a wownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That cheekes with teares, and sydes with blood, did all abownd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And him behynd a wicked Hag did stalke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In ragged robes and filthy disaray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her other leg was lame, that she no’te walke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But on a staffe her feeble steps did stay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her lockes, that loathly were and hoarie gray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Grew all afore, and loosely hong unrold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bat all behinde was bald, and worne away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none thereof could ever taken hold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke her face ill-favourd, full of wrinckles old.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And ever as she went her toung did walke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In fowle reproch, and termes of vile despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Provoking him, by her outrageous talke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To heape more vengeance on that wretched wight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes she raught him stones, wherwith to smite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes her staffe, though it her one leg were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withouten which she could not goe upright;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne any evill meanes she did forbeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That might him move to wrath, and indignation reare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The noble Guyon, mov’d with great remorse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Approching, first the Hag did thrust away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after, adding more impetuous forse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mighty hands did on the madman lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pluckt him backe; who, all on fire streight way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against him turning all his fell intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With beastly brutish rage gan him assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And smott, and bitt, and kickt, and scratcht, and rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And did he wist not what in his avengement.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And sure he was a man of mickle might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had he had governaunce it well to guyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when the frantick fitt inflamd his spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His force was vaine, and strooke more often wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then at the aymed marke which he had eyde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oft himselfe he chaunst to hurt unwares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whylest reason, blent through passion, nought descryde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, as a blindfold Bull, at randon fares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And where he hits nought knowes, and whom he hurts nought cares.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His rude assault and rugged handeling</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Straunge seemed to the knight, that aye with foe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In fayre defence and goodly menaging</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of armes was wont to fight; yet nathemoe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was he abashed now, not fighting so;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But more enfierced through his currish play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him sternly grypt, and hailing to and fro,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To overthrow him strongly did assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But overthrew himselfe unwares, and lower lay:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And being downe the villein sore did beate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bruze with clownish fistes his manly face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the Hag, with many a bitter threat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still cal’d upon to kill him in the place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With whose reproch, and odious menace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The knight emboyling in his haughtie hart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Knitt all his forces, and gan soone unbrace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His grasping hold: so lightly did upstart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drew his deadly weapon to maintaine his part.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when the Palmer saw, he loudly cryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Not so, O Guyon! never thinke that so</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Monster can be maistred or destroyd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He is not, ah! he is not such a foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As steele can wound, or strength can overthroe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That same is Furor, cursed cruel wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That unto knighthood workes much shame and woe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that same Hag, his aged mother, hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Occasion; the roote of all wrath and despight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“With her, whoso will raging Furor tame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Must first begin, and well her amenage:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First her restraine from her reprochfull blame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evill meanes, with which she doth enrage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her frantick sonne, and kindles his corage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, when she is withdrawne or strong withstood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It’s eath his ydle fury to aswage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And calme the tempest of his passion wood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bankes are overflowne when stopped is the flood.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith Sir Guyon left his first emprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, turning to that woman, fast her hent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By the hoare lockes that hong before her eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the ground her threw: yet n’ould she stent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her bitter rayling and foule revilement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But still provokt her sonne to wreake her wrong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But nathelesse he did her still torment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, catching hold of her ungratious tonge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereon an yron lock did fasten firme and strong.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then, whenas use of speach was from her reft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With her two crooked handes she signes did make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And beckned him, the last help she had left;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he that last left helpe away did take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both her handes fast bound unto a stake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she note stirre. Then gan her sonne to flye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full fast away, and did her quite forsake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Guyon after him in hast did hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And soone him overtooke in sad perplexitye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In his strong armes he stifly him embraste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who him gainstriving nought at all prevaild;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all his power was utterly defaste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And furious fitts at earst quite weren quaild:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oft he re’nforst, and oft his forces fayld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet yield he would not, nor his rancor slack.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then him to ground he cast, and rudely hayld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both his hands fast bound behind his backe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And both his feet in fetters to an yron racke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With hundred yron chaines he did him bind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hundred knots, that did him sore constraine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet his great yron teeth he still did grind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And grimly gnash, threatning revenge in vaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His burning eyen, whom bloody strakes did staine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stared full wide, and threw forth sparkes of fyre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And more for ranck despight then for great paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shakt his long locks colourd like copper-wyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bitt his tawny beard to shew his raging yre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus when as Guyon Furor had captivd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turning about he saw that wretched Squyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom that mad man of life nigh late deprivd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lying on ground, all soild with blood and myre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom whenas he perceived to respyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan to comfort, and his woundes to dresse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being at last recured, he gan inquyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What hard mishap him brought to such distresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made that caytives thrall, the thrall of wretchednesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With hart then throbbing, and with watry eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Fayre Sir” (quoth he) “what man can shun the hap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hidden lyes unwares him to surpryse?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Misfortune waites advantage to entrap</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The man most wary in her whelming lap:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So me weake wretch, of many weakest one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unweeting and unware of such mishap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She brought to mischiefe through Occasion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where this same wicked villein did me light upon.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“It was a faithlesse Squire, that was the sourse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all my sorrow and of these sad teares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With whom from tender dug of commune nourse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Attonce I was upbrought; and eft, when yeares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More rype us reason lent to chose our Peares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our selves in league of vowed love wee knitt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which we long time, without gealous feares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or faultie thoughts, contynewd as was fitt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for my part, I vow, dissembled not a whitt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“It was my fortune, commune to that age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To love a Lady fayre of great degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which was borne of noble parentage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And set in highest seat of dignitee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet seemd no lesse to love then lov’d to bee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long I her serv’d, and found her faithfull still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever thing could cause us disagree.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Love, that two harts makes one, makes eke one will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each strove to please, and others pleasure to fulfill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“My friend, hight Philemon, I did partake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all my love and all my privitie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who greatly joyous seemed for my sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gratious to that Lady as to mee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever wight that mote so welcome bee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he to her, withouten blott or blame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever thing that she could think or see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But unto him she would impart the same.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O wretched man, that would abuse so gentle Dame!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“At last such grace I found, and meanes I wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I that Lady to my spouse had wonne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Accord of friendes, consent of Parents sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Affyaunce made, my happinesse begonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There wanted nought but few rites to be donne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which mariage make: that day too farre did seeme.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most joyous man, on whom the shining Sunne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did shew his face, my selfe I did esteeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that my falser friend did no less joyous deeme.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But ear that wished day his beame disclosd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He, either envying my toward good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or of him selfe to treason ill disposd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One day unto me came in friendly mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And told for secret, how he understood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Lady, whom I had to me assynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had both distaind her honorable blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the faith which she to me did bynd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore wisht me stay till I more truth should fynd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The gnawing anguish, and sharp gelosy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which his sad speach infixed in my brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ranckled so sore, and festred inwardly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That my engreeved mind could find no rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that the truth thereof I did out wrest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him besought, by that same sacred band</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Betwixt us both, to counsell me the best:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He then with solemne oath and plighted hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Assurd, ere long the truth to let me understand.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ere long with like againe he boorded mee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saying, he now had boulted all the floure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that it was a groome of base degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which of my love was partener Paramoure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who used in a darkesome inner bowre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her oft to meete: which better to approve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He promised to bring me at that howre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When I should see that would me nearer move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drive me to withdraw my blind abused love.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“This gracelesse man, for furtherance of his guile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did court the handmayd of my Lady deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, glad t’embosome his affection vile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did all she might more pleasing to appeare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One day, to worke her to his will more neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He woo’d her thus: Pryene, (so she hight,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What great despight doth fortune to thee beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus lowly to abase thy beautie bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it should not deface all others lesser light?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But if she had her least helpe to thee lent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T’adorne thy forme according thy desart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their blazing pride thou wouldest soone have blent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And staynd their prayses with thy least good part;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne should faire Claribell with all her art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho’she thy Lady be, approch thee neare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For proofe thereof, this evening, as thou art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Aray thyselfe in her most gorgeous geare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I may more delight in thy embracement deare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The Mayden, proud through praise and mad through love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him hearkned to, and soone herselfe aray’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles to me the treachour did remove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His craftie engin; and, as he had sayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me leading, in a secret corner layd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sad spectatour of my Tragedie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where left, he went, and his owne false part playd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disguised like that groome of base degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom he had feignd th’abuser of my love to bee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Eftsoones he came unto th’appointed place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with him brought Pryene, rich arayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Claribellaes clothes. Her proper face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I not descerned in that darkesome shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But weend it was my love with whom he playd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah God! what horrour and tormenting griefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My hart, my handes, mine eies, and all assayd!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me liefer were ten thousand deathes priefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then wounde of gealous worme, and shame of such repriefe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“I home retourning, fraught with fowle despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chawing vengeaunce all the way I went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone as my loathed love appeard in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With wrathfull hand I slew her innocent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That after soone I dearely did lament;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, when the cause of that outrageous deede</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Demaunded, I made plaine and evident,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her faultie Handmayd, which that bale did breede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Confest how Philemon her wrought to chaunge her weede.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Which when I heard, with horrible affright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hellish fury all enragd, I sought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon myselfe that vengeable despight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To punish: yet it better first I thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wreake my wrath on him that first it wrought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Philemon, false faytour Philemon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I cast to pay that I so dearely bought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of deadly drugs I gave him drink anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And washt away his guilt with guilty potion.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thus heaping crime on crime, and griefe on griefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To losse of love adjoyning losse of frend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I meant to purge both with a third mischiefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in my woes beginner it to end:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was Pryene; she did first offend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She last should smart: with which cruell intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When I at her my murdrous blade did bend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She fled away with ghastly dreriment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I, poursewing my fell purpose, after went.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Feare gave her winges, and rage enforst my flight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through woods and plaines so long I did her chace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till this mad man, whom your victorious might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath now fast bound, me met in middle space.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As I her, so he me poursewd apace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shortly overtooke: I, breathing yre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sore chauffed at my stay in such a cace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with my heat kindled his cruell fyre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which kindled once, his mother did more rage inspyre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Betwixt them both they have me doen to dye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through wounds, and strokes, and stubborne handeling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That death were better then such agony</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As griefe and fury unto me did bring;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which in me yet stickes the mortall sting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That during life will never be appeasd!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When he thus ended had his sorrowing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said Guyon; “Squyre, sore have ye beene diseasd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all your hurts may soone through temperance be easd.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then gan the Palmer thus; “Most wretched man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to affections does the bridle lend!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In their beginning they are weake and wan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But soone through suff’rance growe to fearefull end:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles they are weake, betimes with them contend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, when they once to perfect strength do grow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strong warres they make, and cruell battry bend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst fort of Reason, it to overthrow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wrath, gelosy, griefe, love, this Squyre have laide thus low.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Wrath, gealosie, griefe, love, do thus expell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wrath is a fire; and gealosie a weede;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Griefe is a flood; and love a monster fell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fire of sparkes, the weede of little seede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The flood of drops, the Monster filth did breede:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But sparks, seed, drops, and filth, do thus delay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sparks soone quench, the springing seed outweed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The drops dry up, and filth wipe cleane away:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So shall wrath, gealosy, griefe, love, die and decay.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Unlucky Squire,” (saide Guyon) “sith thou hast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Falne into mischiefe through intemperaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Henceforth take heede of that thou now hast past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And guyde thy waies with warie governaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least worse betide thee by some later chaunce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But read how art thou nam’d, and of what kin?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Phaon I hight,” (quoth he) “and do advaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mine auncestry from famous Coradin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who first to rayse our house to honour did begin.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus as he spake, lo! far away they spyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A varlet ronning towardes hastily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose flying feet so fast their way applyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That round about a cloud of dust did fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, mingled all with sweate, did dim his eye.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He soone approched, panting, breathlesse, whot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all so soyld that none could him descry:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His countenaunce was bold, and bashed not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Guyons lookes, but scornefull eyeglaunce at him shot.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Behind his backe he bore a brasen shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which was drawen faire, in colours fit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A flaming fire in midst of bloody field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And round about the wreath this word was writ,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><em>Burnt I doe burne</em>. Right well beseemed it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be the shield of some redoubted knight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his hand two dartes, exceeding flit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And deadly sharp, he held, whose heads were dight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In poyson and in blood of malice and despight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When he in presence came, to Guyon first</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He boldly spake; “Sir knight, if knight thou bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abandon this forestalled place at erst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For feare of further harme, I counsell thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or bide the chaunce at thine own jeopardee.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The knight at his great boldnesse wondered;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, though he scornd his ydle vanitee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet mildly him to purpose answered;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For not to grow of nought he it conjectured.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Varlet, this place most dew to me I deeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yielded by him that held it forcibly:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But whence should come that harme, which thou dost seeme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To threat to him that mindes his chaunce t’abye?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Perdy,” (sayd he) “here comes, and is hard by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A knight of wondrous powre and great assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That never yet encountred enemy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But did him deadly daunt, or fowle dismay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne thou for better hope, if thou his presence stay.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“How hight he then,” (sayd Guyon) “and from whence?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Pyrochles is his name, renowmed farre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For his bold feates and hardy confidence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full oft approvd in many a cruell warre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The brother of Cymochles, both which arre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sonnes of old Acrates and Despight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Acrates, sonne of Phlegeton and Jarre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Phlegeton is sonne of Herebus and Night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Herebus sonne of Aeternitie is hight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“So from immortall race he does proceede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That mortall hands may not withstand his might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drad for his derring doe and bloody deed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all in blood and spoile is his delight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His am I Atin, his in wrong and right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That matter make for him to worke upon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stirre him up to strife and cruell fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fly therefore, fly this fearefull stead anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Least thy foolhardize worke thy sad confusion.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“His be that care, whom most it doth concerne,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Sayd he) “but whither with such hasty flight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Art thou now bownd? for well mote I discerne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great cause, that carries thee so swifte and light.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“My Lord,” (quoth he) “me sent, and streight behight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke Occasion, where so she bee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he is all disposd to bloody fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And breathes out wrath and hainous crueltee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hard is his hap that first fals in his jeopardee.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Mad man,” (said then the Palmer) “that does seeke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Occasion to wrath, and cause of strife:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee comes unsought, and shonned followes eke.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Happy! who can abstaine, when Rancor rife</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kindles Revenge, and threats his rusty knife.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Woe never wants where every cause is caught;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rash Occasion makes unquiet life!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Then loe! wher bound she sits, whom thou hast sought,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said Guyon: “let that message to thy Lord be brought.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That when the varlett heard and saw, streight way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He wexed wondrous wroth, and said; “Vile knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That knights and knighthood doest with shame upbray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shewst th’ensample of thy childishe might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With silly weake old woman that did fight!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great glory and gay spoile, sure hast thou gott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stoutly prov’d thy puissance here in sight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shall Pyrochles well requite, I wott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with thy blood abolish so reprochfull blott.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that one of his thrillant darts he threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Headed with yre, and vengeable despight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The quivering steele his aymed end wel knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to his brest it selfe intended right.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he was wary, and, ere it empight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the meant marke, advaunst his shield atweene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which it seizing no way enter might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But backe rebownding left the forckhead keene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eftsoones he fled away, and might no where be seene.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-5" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Pyrrhochles does with Guyon fight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And Furors chayne unbinds,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of whom sore hurt; for his revenge</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Atin Cymochles finds.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Who ever doth to temperaunce apply</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His stedfast life, and all his actions frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Trust me, shal find no greater enimy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then stubborne perturbation to the same.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which right wel the wise doe give that name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For it the goodly peace of staied mindes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Does overthrow, and troublous warre proclame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His owne woes author, who so bound it findes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As did Pyrochles, and it wilfully unbindes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>After that varlets flight, it was not long</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere on the plaine fast pricking Guyon spide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One in bright armes embatteiled full strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, as the Sunny beames do glaunce and glide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the trembling wave, so shined bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And round about him threw forth sparkling fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemd him to enflame on every side:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His steed was bloody red, and fomed yre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When with the maistring spur he did him roughly stire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Approching nigh, he never staid to greete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne chaffar words, prowd corage to provoke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But prickt so fiers, that underneath his feete</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The smouldring dust did rownd about him smoke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both horse and man nigh able for to choke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fayrly couching his steeleheaded speare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him first saluted with a sturdy stroke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It booted nought Sir Guyon, comming neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thincke such hideous puissaunce on foot to beare;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But lightly shunned it; and, passing by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his bright blade did smite at him so fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the sharpe steele, arriving forcibly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On his broad shield, bitt not, but glauncing fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On his horse necke before the quilted sell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from the head the body sundred quight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So him dismounted low he did compell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On foot with him to matchen equall fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The truncked beast fast bleeding did him fowly dight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sore bruzed with the fall he slow uprose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all enraged thus him loudly shent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Disleall Knight, whose coward corage chose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wreake it selfe on beast all innocent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shund the marke at which it should be ment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therby thine armes seem strong, but manhood frayl:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So hast thou oft with guile thine honor blent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But litle may such guile thee now avayl,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If wonted force and fortune doe me not much fayl.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that he drew his flaming sword, and strooke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At him so fiercely, that the upper marge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his sevenfolded shield away it tooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, glauncing on his helmet, made a large</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And open gash therein: were not his targe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That broke the violence of his intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The weary sowle from thence it would discharge;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nathelesse so sore a buff to him it lent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That made him reele, and to his brest his bever bent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Exceeding wroth was Guyon at that blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And much asham’d that stroke of living arme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should him dismay, and make him stoup so low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though otherwise it did him litle harme:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, hurling high his yron braced arme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He smote so manly on his shoulder plate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all his left side it did quite disarme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet there the steel stayd not, but inly bate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deepe in his flesh, and opened wide a red floodgate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Deadly dismayd with horror of that dint</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pyrochles was, and grieved eke entyre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet nathemore did it his fury stint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But added flame unto his former fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That wel nigh molt his hart in raging yre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne thenceforth his approved skill, to ward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or strike, or hurtle rownd in warlike gyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Remembred he, ne car’d for his saufgard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But rudely rag’d, and like a cruell tygre far’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He hewd, and lasht, and foynd, and thondred blowes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every way did seeke into his life;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne plate, ne male, could ward so mighty throwes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yeilded passage to his cruell knife.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Guyon, in the heat of all his strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was wary wise, and closely did awayt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Avauntage, whilest his foe did rage most rife:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes athwart, sometimes he strook him strayt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And falsed oft his blowes t’illude him with such bayt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like as a Lyon, whose imperiall powre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A prowd rebellious Unicorn defyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T’avoide the rash assault and wrathful stowre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his fiers foe, him to a tree applyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when him ronning in full course he spyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He slips aside; the whiles that furious beast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His precious home, sought of his enimyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strikes in the stocke, ne thence can be releast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to the mighty victor yields a bounteous feast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With such faire sleight him Guyon often fayld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till at the last all breathlesse, weary, faint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him spying, with fresh onsett he assayld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And kindling new his corage seeming queint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strooke him so hugely, that through great constraint</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He made him stoup perforce unto his knee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doe unwilling worship to the Saint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That on his shield depainted he did see:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such homage till that instant never learned hee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom Guyon seeing stoup, poursewed fast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The present offer of faire victory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soone his dreadfull blade about he cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith he smote his haughty crest so hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That streight on grownd made him full low to lye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then on his brest his victor foote he thrust:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that he cryde; “Mercy! doe me not dye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne deeme thy force by fortunes doome unjust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That hath (maugre her spight) thus low me laid in dust.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones his cruel hand Sir Guyon stayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tempring the passion with advizement slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And maistring might on enimy dismayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For th’equall die of warre he well did know:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then to him said; “Live, and alleagaunce owe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To him that gives thee life and liberty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And henceforth by this daies ensample trow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hasty wroth, and heedlesse hazardry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doe breede repentaunce late, and lasting infamy.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So up he let him rise; who, with grim looke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And count’naunce sterne, upstanding, gan to grind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His grated teeth for great disdeigne, and shooke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His sandy lockes, long hanging downe behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Knotted in blood and dust, for grief of mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he in ods of armes was conquered:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet in himselfe some comfort he did find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That him so noble knight had maystered;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose bounty more then might, yet both, he wondered.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which Guyon marking said; “Be nought agriev’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir knight, that thus ye now subdewed arre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was never man, who most conquestes atchiev’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But sometimes had the worse, and lost by warre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet shortly gaynd that losse exceeded farre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Losse is no shame, nor to bee lesse then foe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to bee lesser then himselfe doth marre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both loosers lot, and victours prayse alsoe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vaine others ovcrthrowes who selfe doth overthrow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Fly, O Pyrochles! fly the dreadfull warre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in thy selfe thy lesser partes do move;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Outrageous anger, and woe-working jarre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Direfull impatience, and hart-murdring love:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those, those thy foes, those warriours far remove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which thee to endlesse bale captived lead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But sith in might thou didst my mercy prove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of courtesie to mee the cause aread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thee against me drew with so impetuous dread.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Dreadlesse,” (said he) “that shall I soone declare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It was complaind that thou hadst done great tort</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto an aged woman, poore and bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thralled her in chaines with strong effort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Voide of all succour and needfull comfort;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ill beseemes thee, such as I thee see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To worke such shame. Therefore, I thee exhort</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To chaunge thy will, and set Occasion free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to her captive sonne yield his first libertee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereat Sir Guyon smylde; “And is that all,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Said he) “that thee so sore displeased hath?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great mercy, sure, for to enlarge a thrall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose freedom shall thee turne to greatest scath!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nath’lesse now quench thy whott emboyling wrath:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Loe! there they bee; to thee I yield them free.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereat he, wondrous glad, out of the path</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did lightly leape, where he them bound did see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gan to breake the bands of their captivitee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as Occasion felt her selfe untyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before her sonne could well assoyled bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She to her use returnd, and streight defyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both Guyon and Pyrochles; th’one (said shee)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bycause he wonne; the other, because hee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was wonne. So matter did she make of nought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To stirre up strife, and garre them disagree:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, soone as Furor was enlargd, she sought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To kindle his quencht fyre, and thousand causes wrought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It was not long ere she inflam’d him so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he would algates with Pyrochles fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his redeemer chalengd for his foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because he had not well mainteind his right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yielded had to that same straunger knight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now gan Pyrochles wex as wood as hee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him affronted with impatient might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So both together fiers engrasped bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whyles Guyon standing by their uncouth strife does see.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Him all that while Occasion did provoke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against Pyrochles, and new matter fram’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the old, him stirring to bee wroke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his late wronges, in which she oft him blam’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For suffering such abuse as knighthood sham’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him dishabled quyte. But he was wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne would with vaine occasions be inflam’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet others she more urgent did devise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet nothing could him to impatience entise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Their fell contention still increased more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And more thereby increased Furors might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he his foe has hurt and wounded sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him in blood and durt deformed quight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mother eke, more to augment his spight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now brought to him a flaming fyer brond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which she in Stygian lake, ay burning bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had kindled: that she gave into his hond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That armd with fire more hardly he mote him withstond.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho gan that villein wex so fiers and strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nothing might sustaine his furious forse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He cast him downe to ground, and all along</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drew him through durt and myre without remorse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fowly battered his comely corse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Guyon much disdeigned so loathly sight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last he was compeld to cry perforse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Help, O Sir Guyon! helpe, most noble knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To ridd a wretched man from handes of hellish wight!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The knight was greatly moved at his playnt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gan him dight to succour his distresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that the Palmer, by his grave restraynt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him stayd from yielding pitifull redresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said; “Deare sonne, thy causelesse ruth represse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne let thy stout hart melt in pitty vayne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He that his sorrow sought through wilfulnesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his foe fettred would release agayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deserves to taste his follies fruit, repented payne.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Guyon obayd: So him away he drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From needlesse trouble of renewing fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Already fought, his voyage to poursew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But rash Pyrochles varlett, Atin hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When late he saw his Lord in heavie plight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under Sir Guyons puissaunt stroke to fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him deeming dead, as then he seemd in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fledd fast away to tell his funerall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto his brother, whom Cymochles men did call.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He was a man of rare redoubted might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Famous throughout the world for warlike prayse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And glorious spoiles, purchast in perilous fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full many doughtie knightes he in his dayes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had doen to death, subdewde in equall frayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose carkases, for terrour of his name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of fowles and beastes he made the piteous prayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hong their conquerd armes, for more defame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On gallow trees, in honour of his dearest Dame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His dearest Dame is that Enchaunteresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The vyle Acrasia, that with vaine delightes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ydle pleasures in her Bowre of Blisse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Does charme her lovers, and the feeble sprightes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can call out of the bodies of fraile wightes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom then she does transforme to monstrous hewes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And horribly misshapes with ugly sightes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Captiv’d eternally in yron mewes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And darksom dens, where Titan his face never shewes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There Atin fownd Cymochles sojourning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To serve his Lemans love: for he by kynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was given all to lust and loose living,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When ever his fiers handes he free mote fynd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now he has pourd out his ydle mynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In daintie delices, and lavish joyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having his warlike weapons cast behynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And flowes in pleasures and vaine pleasing toyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mingled emongst loose Ladies and lascivious boyes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And over him art, stryving to compayre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With nature, did an Arber greene dispred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Framed of wanton Yvie, flouring fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through which the fragrant Eglantine did spred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His prickling armes, entrayld with roses red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which daintie odours round about them threw:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all within with flowres was garnished,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, when myld Zephyrus emongst them blew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did breath out bounteous smels, and painted colors shew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And fast beside there trickled softly downe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A gentle streame, whose murmuring wave did play</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emongst the puny stones, and made a sowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To lull him soft asleepe that by it lay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wearie Traveiler, wandring that way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therein did often quench his thristy heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then by it his wearie limbes display,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles creeping slomber made him to forget</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His former payne, and wypt away his toilsom sweat.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And on the other syde a pleasaunt grove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was shott up high, full of the stately tree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That dedicated is t’Olympick Jove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to his sonne Alcides, whenas hee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Nemus gayned goodly victoree:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therein the mery birdes of every sorte</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Chaunted alowd their chearefull harmonee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made emongst them selves a sweete consort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That quickned the dull spright with musicall comfort.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There he him found all carelesly displaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In secrete shadow from the sunny ray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On a sweet bed of lillies softly laid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amidst a flock of Damzelles fresh and gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That rownd about him dissolute did play</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their wanton follies and light meriments:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Every of which did loosely disaray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her upper partes of meet habiliments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shewd them naked, deckt with many ornaments.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And every of them strove with most delights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him to aggrate, and greatest pleasures shew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some framd faire lookes, glancing like evening lights;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Others sweet wordes, dropping like honny dew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some bathed kisses, and did soft embrew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sugred licour through his melting lips:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One boastes her beautie, and does yield to vew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her dainty limbes above her tender hips;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another her out boastes, and all for tryall strips.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He, like an Adder lurking in the weedes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His wandring thought in deepe desire does steepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his frayle eye with spoyle of beauty feedes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes he falsely faines himselfe to sleepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles through their lids his wanton eies do peepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To steale a snatch of amorous conceipt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereby close fire into his heart does creepe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So he them deceives, deceivd in his deceipt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made dronke with drugs of deare voluptuous receipt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Atin, arriving there, when him he spyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus in still waves of deepe delight to wade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fiercely approching to him lowdly cryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Cymochles; oh! no, but Cymochles shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which that manly person late did fade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What is become of great Acrates sonne?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or where hath he hong up his mortall blade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hath so many haughty conquests wonne?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is all his force forlorne, and all his glory donne?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then, pricking him with his sharp-pointed dart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He saide; “Up, up! thou womanish weake knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That here in Ladies lap entombed art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unmindfull of thy praise and prowest might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And weetlesse eke of lately wrought despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles sad Pyrochles lies on sencelesse ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And groneth out his utmost grudging spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through many a stroke and many a streaming wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Calling thy help in vaine that here in joyes art dround.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Suddeinly out of his delightfull dreame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The man awoke, and would have questiond more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he would not endure that wofull theame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For to dilate at large, but urged sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With percing wordes and pittifull implore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him hasty to arise. As one affright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hellish feends, or Furies made uprore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He then uprose, inflamd with fell despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And called for his armes, for he would algates fight:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They bene ybrought; he quickly does him dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lightly mounted passeth on his way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne Ladies loves, ne sweete entreaties, might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Appease his heat, or hastie passage stay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he has vowd to beene avengd that day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(That day it selfe him seemed all too long)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On him, that did Pyrochles deare dismay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So proudly pricketh on his courser strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Atin ay him pricks with spurs of shame and wrong.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-6" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Guyon is of immodest Merth</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Led into loose Desire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fights with Cymochles, whiles his bro⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Ther burnes in furious fire.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A harder lesson to learne Continence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In joyous pleasure then in grievous paine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For sweetnesse doth allure the weaker sence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So strongly, that uneathes it can refraine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From that which feeble nature covets faine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But griefe and wrath, that be her enemies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And foes of life, she better can abstaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet vertue vauntes in both her victories,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Guyon in them all shewes goodly maysteries.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom bold Cymochles traveiling to finde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With cruell purpose bent to wreake on him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wrath which Atin kindled in his mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came to a river, by whose utmost brim</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wayting to passe, he saw whereas did swim</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Along the shore, as swift as glaunce of eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A litle Gondelay, bedecked trim</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With boughes and arbours woven cunningly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That like a litle forrest seemed outwardly.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And therein sate a Lady fresh and fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Making sweet solace to herselfe alone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes she song as lowd as larke in ayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes she laught, as merry as Pope Jone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was there not with her else any one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to her might move cause of meriment:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Matter of merth enough, though there were none,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She could devise; and thousand waies invent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To feede her foolish humour and vaine jolliment.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when far off Cymochles heard and saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He lowdly cald to such as were abord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The little barke unto the shore to draw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him to ferry over that deepe ford.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The merry mariner unto his word</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone hearkned, and her painted bote streightway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turnd to the shore, where that same warlike Lord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She in receiv’d; but Atin by no way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She would admit, albe the knight her much did pray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones her shallow ship away did slide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More swift then swallow sheres the liquid skye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withouten oare or Pilot it to guide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or winged canvas with the wind to fly:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Onely she turnd a pin, and by and by</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It cut away upon the yielding wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne cared she her course for to apply;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For it was taught the way which she would have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And both from rocks and flats it selfe could wisely save.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And all the way the wanton Damsell found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">New merth her passenger to entertaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she in pleasaunt purpose did abound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And greatly joyed merry tales to faine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which a store-house did with her remaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet seemed, nothing well they her became;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all her wordes she drownd with laughter vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wanted grace in utt’ring of the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That turned all her pleasaunce to a scoffing game.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And other whiles vaine toyes she would devize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As her fantasticke wit did most delight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes her head she fondly would aguize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With gaudy girlonds, or fresh flowrets dight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About her necke, or rings of rushes plight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes, to do him laugh, she would assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To laugh at shaking of the leaves light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or to behold the water worke and play</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About her little frigot, therein making way.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her light behaviour and loose dalliaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gave wondrous great contentment to the knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of his way he had no sovenaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor care of vow’d revenge and cruell fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to weake wench did yield his martiall might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So easie was to quench his flamed minde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With one sweete drop of sensuall delight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So easie is t’appease the stormy winde</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of malice in the calme of pleasaunt womankind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Diverse discourses in their way they spent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst which Cymochles of her questioned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both what she was, and what that usage ment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which in her cott she daily practized?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Vaine man,” (saide she) “that wouldest be reckoned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A straunger in thy home, and ignoraunt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Phædria, (for so my name is red)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Phædria, thine owne fellow servaunt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thou to serve Acrasia thy selfe doest vaunt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“In this wide Inland sea, that hight by name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Idle lake, my wandring ship I row,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That knowes her port, and thither sayles by ayme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne care, ne feare I how the wind do blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or whether swift I wend, or whether slow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both slow and swift alike do serve my tourne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne swelling Neptune ne lowd thundring Jove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can chaunge my cheare, or make me ever mourne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My little boat can safely passe this perilous bourne.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whiles thus she talked, and whiles thus she toyd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They were far past the passage which he spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And come unto an Island waste and voyd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That floted in the midst of that great lake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There her small Gondelay her port did make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that gay payre, issewing on the shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disburdned her. Their way they forward take</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the land that lay them faire before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose pleasaunce she him shewd, and plentifull great store.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It was a chosen plott of fertile land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emongst wide waves sett, like a litle nest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if it had by Natures cunning hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bene choycely picked out from all the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And laid forth for ensample of the best:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No daintie flowre or herbe that growes on grownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No arborett with painted blossomes drest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And smelling sweete, but there it might be fownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bud out faire, and throwe her sweete smels al arownd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>No tree whose braunches did not bravely spring;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No braunch whereon a fine bird did not sitt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No bird but did her shrill notes sweetely sing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No song but did containe a lovely ditt.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Trees, braunches, birds, and songs, were framed fitt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For to allure fraile mind to carelesse ease:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Carelesse the man soone woxe, and his weake witt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was overcome of thing that did him please;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So pleased did his wrathfull purpose faire appease.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus when shee had his eyes and sences fed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With false delights, and fild with pleasures vayn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into a shady dale she soft him led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And layd him downe upon a grassy playn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her sweete selfe without dread or disdayn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She sett beside, laying his head disarmd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In her loose lap, it softly to sustayn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where soone he slumbred fearing not be harmd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whiles with a love lay she thus him sweetly charmd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Behold, O man! that toilesome paines doest take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The flowrs, the fields, and all that pleasaunt growes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How they them selves doe thine ensample make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles nothing envious nature them forth throwes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of her fruitfull lap; how no man knowes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They spring, they bud, they blossome fresh and faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And decke the world with their rich pompous showes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet no man for them taketh paines or care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet no man to them can his carefull paines compare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The lilly, Lady of the flowring field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The flowre-deluce, her lovely Paramoure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bid thee to them thy fruitlesse labors yield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soone leave off this toylsome weary stoure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Loe, loe! how brave she decks her bounteous boure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With silkin curtens and gold coverletts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therein to shrowd her sumptuous Belamoure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet nether spinnes nor cards, ne cares nor fretts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to her mother Nature all her care she letts.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Why then doest thou, O man! that of them all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Art Lord, and eke of nature Soveraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wilfully make thyselfe a wretched thrall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And waste thy joyous howres in needelesse paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeking for daunger and adventures vaine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What bootes it al to have, and nothing use?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who shall him rew that swimming in the maine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will die for thrist, and water doth refuse?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Refuse such fruitlesse toile, and present pleasures chuse.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By this she had him lulled fast asleepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of no worldly thing he care did take:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then she with liquors strong his eies did steepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nothing should him hastily awake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So she him lefte, and did her selfe betake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto her boat again, with which she clefte</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The slouthfull wave of that great griesy lake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone shee that Island far behind her lefte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now is come to that same place where first she wefte.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By this time was the worthy Guyon brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the other side of that wide strond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where she was rowing, and for passage sought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him needed not long call; shee soone to hond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her ferry brought, where him she byding fond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his sad guide: him selfe she tooke aboord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the Blacke Palmer suffred still to stond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne would for price or prayers once affoord</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To ferry that old man over the perlous foord.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Guyon was loath to leave his guide behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet being entred might not backe retyre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the flitt barke, obaying to her mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth launched quickly as she did desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne gave him leave to bid that aged sire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adieu; but nimbly ran her wonted course</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through the dull billowes thicke as troubled mire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom nether wind out of their seat could forse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor timely tides did drive out of their sluggish sourse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And by the way, as was her wonted guize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her mery fitt shee freshly gan to reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did of joy and jollity devize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her selfe to cherish, and her guest to cheare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The knight was courteous, and did not forbeare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her honest merth and pleasaunce to partake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when he saw her toy, and gibe, and geare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And passe the bonds of modest merimake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her dalliaunce he despis’d, and follies did forsake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet she still followed her former style,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said and did all that mote him delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till they arrived in that pleasaunt Ile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where sleeping late she lefte her other knight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But whenas Guyon of that land had sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He wist him selfe amisse, and angry said;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Ah, Dame! perdy ye have not doen me right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus to mislead mee, whiles I you obaid:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me litle needed from my right way to have straid.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Faire Sir,” (quoth she) “be not displeasd at all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who fares on sea may not commaund his way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne wind and weather at his pleasure call:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sea is wide, and easy for to stray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wind unstable, and doth never stay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But here a while ye may in safety rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till season serve new passage to assay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Better safe port then be in seas distrest.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therewith she laught, and did her earnest end in jest,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But he, halfe discontent, mote nathelesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himselfe appease, and issewd forth on shore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The joyes whereof and happy fruitfulnesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as he saw she gan him lay before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all, though pleasaunt, yet she made much more:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fields did laugh, the flowres did freshly spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The trees did bud, and early blossomes bore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the quire of birds did sweetly sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And told that gardins pleasures in their caroling.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And she, more sweete then any bird on bough,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would oftentimes emongst them beare a part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strive to passe (as she could well enough)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their native musicke by her skilful art:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So did she all that might his constant hart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withdraw from thought of warlike enterprize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And drowne in dissolute delights apart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where noise of armes, or vew of martiall guize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might not revive desire of knightly exercize.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But he was wise, and wary of her will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever held his hand upon his hart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet would not seeme so rude, and thewed ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As to despise so curteous seeming part</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That gentle Lady did to him impart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, fairly tempring, fond desire subdewd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever her desired to depart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She list not heare, but her disports poursewd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ever bad him stay till time the tide renewd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now by this Cymochles howre was spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he awoke out of his ydle dreme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, shaking off his drowsy dreriment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan him avize, howe ill did him beseme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In slouthfull sleepe his molten hart to steme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And quench the brond of his conceived yre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho up he started, stird with shame extreme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne staied for his Damsell to inquire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But marched to the Strond there passage to require.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And in the way he with Sir Guyon mett,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Accompanyde with Phædria the faire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones he gan to rage, and inly frett,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Crying; “Let be that Lady debonaire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou recreaunt knight, and soone thyselfe prepaire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To batteile, if thou meane her love to gayn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Loe, loe! already how the fowles in aire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe flocke, awaiting shortly to obtayn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy carcas for their pray, the guerdon of thy payn.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And therewithall he fiersly at him flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with importune outrage him assayld;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, soone prepard to field, his sword forth drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him with equall valew countervayld:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their mightie strokes their haberjeons dismayld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And naked made each others manly spalles;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The mortall steele despiteously entayld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deepe in their flesh, quite through the yron walles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That a large purple streame adowne their giambeux falles.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Cymochles, that had never mett before</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So puissant foe, with envious despight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His prowd presumed force increased more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disdeigning to bee held so long in fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir Guyon, grudging not so much his might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As those unknightly raylinges which he spoke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With wrathfull fire his corage kindled bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereof devising shortly to be wroke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And doubling all his powres redoubled every stroke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Both of them high attonce their handes enhaunst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both attonce their huge blowes down did sway.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cymochles sword on Guyons shield yglaunst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thereof nigh one quarter sheard away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Guyons angry blade so fiers did play</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On th’others helmett, which as Titan shone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That quite it clove his plumed crest in tway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bared all his head unto the bone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherewith astonisht, still he stood as sencelesse stone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Still as he stood, fayre Phædria, that beheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That deadly daunger, soone atweene them ran;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at their feet her selfe most humbly feld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Crying with pitteous voyce, and count’nance wan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Ah, well away! most noble Lords, how can</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your cruell eyes endure so pitteous sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To shed your lives on ground? Wo worth the man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That first did teach the cursed steele to bight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his owne flesh, and make way to the living spright!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“If ever love of Lady did empierce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your yron brestes, or pittie could find place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withhold your bloody handes from battaill fierce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, sith for me ye fight, to me this grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both yield, to stay your deadly stryfe a space.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They stayd a while, and forth she gan proceede:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Most wretched woman and of wicked race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That am the authour of this hainous deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cause of death betweene two doughtie knights do breed!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But, if for me ye fight, or me will serve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not this rude kynd of battaill, nor these armes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are meet, the which doe men in bale to sterve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doolefull sorrow heape with deadly harmes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such cruell game my scarmoges disarmes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another warre, and other weapons, I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe love, where love does give his sweet Alarmes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without bloodshed, and where the enimy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Does yield unto his foe a pleasaunt victory.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Debatefull strife, and cruell enmity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The famous name of knighthood fowly shend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But lovely peace, and gentle amity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in Amours the passing howres to spend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The mightie martiall handes doe most commend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of love they ever greater glory bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then of their armes; Mars is Cupidoes frend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And is for Venus loves renowmed more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then all his wars and spoiles, the which he did of yore.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith she sweetly smyld. They, though full bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To prove extremities of bloody fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet at her speach their rages gan relent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And calme the sea of their tempestuous spight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such powre have pleasing wordes: such is the might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of courteous clemency in gentle hart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now after all was ceast, the Faery knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besought that Damzell suffer him depart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yield him ready passage to that other part.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She no lesse glad then he desirous was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his departure thence; for of her joy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And vaine delight she saw he light did pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A foe of folly and immodest toy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still solemne sad, or still disdainfull coy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Delighting all in armes and cruell warre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her sweet peace and pleasures did annoy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Troubled with terrour and unquiet jarre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she well pleased was thence to amove him farre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho him she brought abord, and her swift bote</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forthwith directed to that further strand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which on the dull waves did lightly flote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soone arrived on the shallow sand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where gladsome Guyon salied forth to land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to that Damsell thankes gave for reward.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon that shore he spyed Atin stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There by his maister left, when late he far’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Phædrias flitt barck over that perlous shard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Well could he him remember, sith of late</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He with Pyrochles sharp debatement made:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Streight gan he him revyle, and bitter rate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Shepheardes curre, that in darke eveninges shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath tracted forth some salvage beastes trade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Vile Miscreaunt,” (said he) “whither dost thou flye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The shame and death, which will thee soone invade?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What coward hand shall doe thee next to dye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That art thus fowly fledd from famous enimy?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that he stifly shooke his steelhead dart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But sober Guyon, hearing him so rayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though somewhat moved in his mightie hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet with strong reason maistred passion fraile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And passed fayrely forth. He, turning taile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Back to the strond retyrd, and there still stayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Awaiting passage which him late did faile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles Cymochles with that wanton mayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hasty heat of his avowd revenge delayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whylest there the varlet stood, he saw from farre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An armed knight that towardes him fast ran;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He ran on foot, as if in lucklesse warre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His forlorne steed from him the victour wan:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He seemed breathlesse, hartlesse, faint, and wan;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all his armour sprinckled was with blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soyld with durtie gore, that no man can</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Discerne the hew thereof. He never stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But bent his hastie course towardes the ydle flood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The varlett saw, when to the flood he came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How without stop or stay he fiersly lept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And deepe him selfe beducked in the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in the lake his loftie crest was stept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne of his safetie seemed care he kept;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with his raging armes he rudely flasht</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The waves about, and all his armour swept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the blood and filth away was washt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet still he bet the water, and the billowes dasht.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Atin drew nigh to weet what it mote bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For much he wondred at that uncouth sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom should he but his owne deare Lord there see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His owne deare Lord Pyrochles in sad plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ready to drowne him selfe for fell despight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Harrow now out, and well away!” he cryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“What dismall day hath lent this cursed light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see my Lord so deadly damnifyde?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pyrochles, O Pyrochles! what is thee betyde?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“I burne, I burne, I burne!” then lowd he cryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“O! how I burne with implacable fyre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet nought can quench mine inly flaming syde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor sea of licour cold, nor lake of myre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nothing but death can doe me to respyre.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Ah! be it,” (said he) “from Pyrochles farre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After pursewing death once to requyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or think, that ought those puissant hands may marre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death is for wretches borne under unhappy starre.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Perdye, then is it fitt for me,” (said he)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“That am, I weene, most wretched man alive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Burning in flames, yet no flames can I see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dying dayly, dayly yet revive.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O Atin! helpe to me last death to give.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The varlet at his plaint was grieved so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That his deepe wounded hart in two did rive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, his owne health remembring now no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did follow that ensample which he blam’d afore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Into the lake he lept his Lord to ayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(So Love the dread of daunger doth despise)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of him catching hold him strongly stayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From drowning. But more happy he then wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that seas nature did him not avise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The waves thereof so slow and sluggish were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Engrost with mud which did them fowle agrise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That every weighty thing they did upbeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne ought mote ever sinck downe to the bottom there.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whiles thus they strugled in that ydle wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strove in vaine, the one him selfe to drowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other both from drowning for to save,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lo! to that shore one in an auncient gowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose hoary locks great gravitie did crowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Holding in hand a goodly arming sword,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By fortune came, ledd with the troublous sowne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where drenched deepe he fownd in that dull ford</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The carefull servaunt stryving with his raging Lord.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Him Atin spying knew right well of yore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lowdly cald; “Help, helpe! O Archimage!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To save my Lord in wretched plight forlore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Helpe with thy hand, or with thy counsell sage:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weake handes, but counsell is most strong in age.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him when the old man saw, he wondred sore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see Pyrochles there so rudely rage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet sithens helpe, he saw, he needed more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then pitty, he in hast approched to the shore,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And cald; “Pyrochles! what is this I see?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What hellish fury hath at earst thee hent?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Furious ever I thee knew to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet never in this straunge astonishment.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“These flames, these flames” (he cryde) “doe me torment.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“What flames,” (quoth he) “when I thee present see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In daunger rather to be drent then brent?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Harrow! the flames which me consume,” (said hee)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Ne can be quencht, within my secret bowelles bee.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“That cursed man, that cruel feend of hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Furor, oh! Furor hath me thus bedight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His deadly woundes within my liver swell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his whott fyre burnes in mine entralles bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kindled through his infernall brond of spight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith late with him I batteill vaine would boste;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That now, I weene, Joves dreaded thunder light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Does scorch not halfe so sore, nor damned ghoste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In flaming Phlegeton does not so felly roste.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when as Archimago heard, his griefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He knew right well, and him attonce disarm’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then searcht his secret woundes, and made a priefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of every place that was with bruzing harmd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or with the hidden fire too inly warmd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which doen, he balmes and herbes thereto applyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evermore with mightie spels them charmd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in short space he has them qualifyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And him restor’d to helth that would have algates dyde.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-7" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Guyon findes Mamon in a delve,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Sunning his threasure hore:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is by him tempted, and led down,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To see his secrete store.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>As pilot well expert in perilous wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to a stedfast starre his course hath bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When foggy mistes or cloudy tempests have</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The faithfull light of that faire lampe yblent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cover’d heaven with hideous dreriment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his card and compas firmes his eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The maysters of his long experiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to them does the steddy helme apply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bidding his winged vessell fairely forward fly:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So Guyon having lost his trustie guyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Late left beyond that Ydle lake, proceedes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet on his way, of none accompanyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evermore himselfe with comfort feedes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his own vertues and praise-worthie deedes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So, long he yode, yet no adventure found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which fame of her shrill trompet worthy reedes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For still he traveild through wide wastfull ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That nought but desert wildernesse shewed all around.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last he came unto a gloomy glade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cover’d with boughes and shrubs from heavens light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereas he sitting found in secret shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An uncouth, salvage, and uncivile wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of griesly hew and fowle ill favour’d sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His face with smoke was tand, and eies were bleard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His head and beard with sout were ill bedight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His cole-blacke hands did seeme to have ben seard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In smythes fire-spitting forge, and nayles like clawes appeard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His yron cote, all overgrowne with rust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was underneath enveloped with gold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose glistring glosse, darkned with filthy dust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well yet appeared to have beene of old</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A worke of rich entayle and curious mould,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Woven with antickes and wyld ymagery;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his lap a masse of coyne he told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And turned upside downe, to feede his eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And covetous desire with his huge threasury.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And round about him lay on every side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great heapes of gold that never could be spent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which some were rude owre, not purifide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Mulcibers devouring element;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some others were new driven, and distent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into great Ingowes and to wedges square;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some in round plates withouten moniment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But most were stampt, and in their metal bare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The antique shapes of kings and kesars straunge and rare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as he Guyon saw, in great affright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And haste he rose for to remove aside</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those pretious hils from straungers envious sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And downe them poured through an hole full wide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the hollow earth, them there to hide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Guyon, lightly to him leaping, stayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His hand that trembled as one terrifyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And though himselfe were at the sight dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet him perforce restraynd, and to him doubtfull sayd:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“What art thou, man, (if man at all thou art)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That here in desert hast thine habitaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And these rich hils of welth doest hide apart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the worldes eye, and from her right usaunce?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereat, with staring eyes fixed askaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In great disdaine he answerd: “Hardy Elfe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That darest view my direfull countenaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I read thee rash and heedlesse of thy selfe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To trouble my still seate, and heapes of pretious pelfe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“God of the world and worldlings I me call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great Mammon, greatest god below the skye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of my plenty poure out unto all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto none my graces do envye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Riches, renowme, and principality,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Honour, estate, and all this worldes good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which men swinck and sweat incessantly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fro me do flow into an ample flood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the hollow earth have their eternall brood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Wherefore, if me thou deigne to serve and sew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At thy commaund lo! all these mountaines bee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or if to thy great mind, or greedy vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All these may not suffise, there shall to thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ten times so much be nombred francke and free.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Mammon,” (said he) “thy godheads vaunt is vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And idle offers of thy golden fee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To them that covet such eye-glutting gaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Proffer thy giftes, and fitter servaunts entertaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Me ill besits, that in der-doing armes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And honours suit my vowed daies do spend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto thy bounteous baytes and pleasing charmes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which weake men thou witchest, to attend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Regard of worldly mucke doth fowly blend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And low abase the high heroicke spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That joyes for crownes and kingdomes to contend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire shields, gay steedes, bright armes be my delight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those be the riches fit for an advent’rous knight.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Vaine glorious Elfe,” (saide he) “doest not thou weet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That money can thy wantes at will supply?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sheilds, steeds, and armes, and all things for thee meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It can purvay in twinckling of an eye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And crownes and kingdomes to thee multiply.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do not I kings create, and throw the crowne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes to him that low in dust doth ly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him that raignd into his rowme thrust downe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And whom I lust do heape with glory and renowne?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“All otherwise” (saide he) “I riches read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And deeme them roote of all disquietnesse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First got with guile, and then preserv’d with dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after spent with pride and lavishnesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Leaving behind them griefe and heavinesse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Infinite mischiefes of them doe arize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strife and debate, bloodshed and bitternesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Outrageous wrong, and hellish covetize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That noble heart as great dishonour doth despize.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ne thine be kingdomes, ne the scepters thine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But realmes and rulers thou doest both confound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And loyall truth to treason doest incline:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Witnesse the guiltlesse blood pourd oft on ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The crowned often slaine, the slayer cround;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sacred Diademe in peeces rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And purple robe gored with many a wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Castles surprizd, great cities sackt and brent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So mak’st thou kings, and gaynest wrongfull government.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Long were to tell the troublous stormes that tosse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The private state, and make the life unsweet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who swelling sayles in Caspian sea doth crosse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in frayle wood on Adrian gulf doth fleet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth not, I weene, so many evils meet.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Mammon wexing wroth; “And why then,” sayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Are mortall men so fond and undiscreet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So evill thing to seeke unto their ayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And having not complaine, and having it upbrayd?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Indeede,” (quoth he) “through fowle intemperaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Frayle men are oft captiv’d to covetise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But would they thinke with how small allowaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untroubled Nature doth her selfe suffise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such superfluities they would despise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with sad cares empeach our native joyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At the well-head the purest streames arise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But mucky filth his braunching armes annoyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with uncomely weedes the gentle wave accloyes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The antique world, in his first flowring youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fownd no defect in his Creators grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with glad thankes, and unreproved truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The guifts of soveraine bounty did embrace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like Angels life was then mens happy cace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But later ages pride, like corn-fed steed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abusd her plenty and fat swolne encreace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To all licentious lust, and gan exceed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The measure of her meane and naturall first need.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Then gan a cursed hand the quiet wombe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his great Grandmother with steele to wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the hid treasures in her sacred tombe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Sacriledge to dig. Therein he fownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fountaines of gold and silver to abownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which the matter of his huge desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pompous pride eftsoones he did compownd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then avarice gan through his veines inspire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His greedy flames, and kindled life-devouring fire.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Sonne,” (said he then) “lett be thy bitter scorne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And leave the rudenesse of that antique age</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To them that liv’d therin in state forlorne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou, that doest live in later times, must wage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy workes for wealth, and life for gold engage.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If then thee list my offred grace to use,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Take what thou please of all this surplusage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If thee list not, leave have thou to refuse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thing refused doe not afterward accuse.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Me list not” (said the Elfin knight) “receave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thing offred, till I know it well be gott;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne wote I but thou didst these goods bereave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From rightfull owner by unrighteous lott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that bloodguiltinesse or guile them blott.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Perdy,” (quoth he) “yet never eie did vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne tong did tell, ne hand these handled not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But safe I have them kept in secret mew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From hevens sight, and powre of al which them poursew.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“What secret place” (quoth he) “can safely hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So huge a masse, and hide from heavens eie?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or where hast thou thy wonne, that so much gold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou canst preserve from wrong and robbery?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Come thou,” (quoth he) “and see.” So by and by</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through that thick covert he him led, and fownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A darkesome way, which no man could descry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That deep descended through the hollow grownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And was with dread and horror compassed arownd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At length they came into a larger space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That stretcht itselfe into an ample playne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through which a beaten broad high way did trace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That streight did lead to Plutoes griesly rayne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By that wayes side there sate internall Payne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fast beside him sat tumultuous Strife:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The one in hand an yron whip did strayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other brandished a bloody knife;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And both did gnash their teeth, and both did threten life.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>On thother side in one consort there sate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cruell Revenge, and rancorous Despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disloyall Treason, and hart-burning Hate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But gnawing Gealosy, out of their sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sitting alone, his bitter lips did bight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And trembling Feare still to and fro did fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And found no place wher safe he shroud him might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lamenting Sorrow did in darknes lye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shame his ugly face did hide from living eye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And over them sad horror with grim hew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did alwaies sore, beating his yron wings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after him Owles and Night-ravens flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hatefull messengers of heavy things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of death and dolor telling sad tidings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles sad Celeno, sitting on a clifte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A song of bale and bitter sorrow sings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hart of flint asonder could have rifte;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which having ended after him she flyeth swifte.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All these before the gates of Pluto lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By whom they passing spake unto them nought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But th’Elfin knight with wonder all the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did feed his eyes, and fild his inner thought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last him to a litle dore he brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to the gate of Hell, which gaped wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was next adjoyning, ne them parted ought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Betwixt them both was but a litle stride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That did the house of Richesse from hell-mouth divide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Before the dore sat selfe-consuming Care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Day and night keeping wary watch and ward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For feare least Force or Fraud should unaware</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Breake in, and spoile the treasure there in gard:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne would he suffer Sleepe once thither-ward</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Approch, albe his drowsy den were next;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For next to death is Sleepe to be compard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore his house is unto his annext:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here Sleep, ther Richesse, and Hel-gate them both betwext.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So soon as Mammon there arrivd, the dore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To him did open and affoorded way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him followed eke Sir Guyon evermore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne darkenesse him, ne daunger might dismay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone as he entred was, the dore streight way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did shutt, and from behind it forth there lept</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An ugly feend, more fowle then dismall day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which with monstrous stalke behind him stept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ever as he went dew watch upon him kept.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Well hoped hee, ere long that hardy guest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If ever covetous hand, or lustfull eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or lips he layd on thing that likte him best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ever sleepe his eie-strings did untye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should be his pray. And therefore still on hye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He over him did hold his cruell clawes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Threatning with greedy gripe to doe him dye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rend in peeces with his ravenous pawes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If ever he transgrest the fatall Stygian lawes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That houses forme within was rude and strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lyke an huge cave hewne out of rocky clifte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whose rough vaut the ragged breaches hong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Embost with massy gold of glorious guifte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with rich metall loaded every rifte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That heavy ruine they did seeme to threatt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And over them Arachne high did lifte</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her cunning web, and spred her subtile nett,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enwrapped in fowle smoke and clouds more black then Jett.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Both roofe, and floore, and walls, were all of gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But overgrowne with dust and old decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hid in darkenes, that none could behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hew thereof; for vew of cherefull day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did never in that house it selfe display,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But a faint shadow of uncertein light:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as a lamp, whose life does fade away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or as the Moone, cloathed with clowdy night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Does show to him that walkes in feare and sad affright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In all that rowme was nothing to be seene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But huge great yron chests, and coffers strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All bard with double bends, that none could weene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them to efforce by violence or wrong:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On every side they placed were along;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all the grownd with sculs was scattered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dead mens bones, which round about were flong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose lives, it seemed, whilome there were shed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And their vile carcases now left unburied.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They forward passe; ne Guyon yet spoke word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that they came unto an yron dore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to them opened of his owne accord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shewd of richesse such exceeding store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As eie of man did never see before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever could within one place be fownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though all the wealth which is, or was of yore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could gathered be through all the world arownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that above were added to that under grownd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The charge thereof unto a covetous Spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Commaunded was, who thereby did attend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And warily awaited day and night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From other covetous feends it to defend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who it to rob and ransacke did intend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Mammon, turning to that warriour, said;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Loe! here the worldes blis: loe! here the end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which al men doe ayme, rich to be made:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such grace now to be happy is before thee laid.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Certes,” (sayd he) “I n’ill thine offred grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne to be made so happy doe intend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another blis before mine eyes I place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another happines, another end.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To them that list these base regardes I lend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But I in armes, and in atchievements brave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do rather choose my flitting houres to spend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to be Lord of those that riches have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then them to have my selfe, and be their servile sclave.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereat the feend his gnashing teeth did grate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And griev’d so long to lacke his greedie pray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For well he weened that so glorious bayte</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would tempt his guest to take thereof assay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had he so doen, he had him snatcht away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More light then Culver in the Faulcons fist.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eternall God thee save from such decay!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, whenas Mammon saw his purpose mist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him to entrap unwares another way he wist.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thence forward he him ledd, and shortly brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto another rowme, whose dore forthright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To him did open, as it had beene taught.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therein an hundred raunges weren pight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hundred fournaces all burning bright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By every fournace many feendes did byde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deformed creatures, horrible in sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every feend his busie paines applyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To melt the golden metall, ready to be tryde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One with great bellowes gathered filling ayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with forst wind the fewell did inflame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another did the dying bronds repayre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With yron tongs, and sprinckled ofte the same</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With liquid waves, fiers Vulcans rage to tame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, maystring them, renewd his former heat:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some scumd the drosse that from the metall came;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some stird the molten owre with ladles great;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every one did swincke, and every one did sweat.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, when an earthly wight they present saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Glistring in armes and battailous aray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From their whot work they did themselves withdraw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wonder at the sight; for till that day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They never creature saw that cam that way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their staring eyes sparckling with fervent fyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ugly shapes did nigh the man dismay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, were it not for shame, he would retyre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till that him thus bespake their soveraine Lord and syre;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Behold, thou Faeries sonne, with mortall eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That living eye before did never see.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The thing, that thou didst crave so earnestly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet whence all the wealth late shewd by mee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proceeded, lo! now is reveald to thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here is the fountaine of the worldes good:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now, therefore, if thou wilt enriched bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Avise thee well, and chaunge thy wilfull mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Least thou perhaps hereafter wish, and be withstood.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Suffise it then, thou Money God,” (quoth hee)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“That all thine ydle offers I refuse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All that I need I have: what needeth mee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To covet more then I have cause to use?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With such vaine shewes thy worldlinges vyle abuse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But give me leave to follow mine emprise.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mammon was much displeasd, yet no’te he chuse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But beare the rigour of his bold mesprise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thence him forward ledd him further to entise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He brought him, through a darksom narrow strayt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To a broad gate all built of beaten gold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gate was open; but therein did wayt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A sturdie villein, stryding stiffe and bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if the highest God defy he would:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his right hand an yron club he held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he himselfe was all of golden mould,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet had both life and sence, and well could weld</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That cursed weapon, when his cruell foes he queld.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Disdayne he called was, and did disdayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be so cald, and who so did him call:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sterne was his looke, and full of stomacke vayne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His portaunce terrible, and stature tall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far passing th’hight of men terrestriall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like an huge Gyant of the Titans race;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That made him scorne all creatures great and small,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his pride all others powre deface:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More fitt emongst black fiendes then men to have his place.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as those glitterand armes he did espye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with their brightnesse made that darknes light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His harmefull club he gan to hurtle hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And threaten batteill to the Faery knight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who likewise gan himselfe to batteill dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till Mammon did his hasty hand withhold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And counseld him abstaine from perilous fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For nothing might abash the villein bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne mortall steele emperce his miscreated mould.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So having him with reason pacifyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that fiers Carle commaunding to forbeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He brought him in. The rowme was large and wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As it some Gyeld or solemne Temple weare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Many great golden pillours did upbeare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The massy roofe, and riches huge sustayne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every pillour decked was full deare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With crownes, and Diademes, and titles vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which mortall Princes wore whiles they on earth did rayne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A route of people there assembled were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of every sort and nation under skye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with great uprore preaced to draw nere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To th’upper part, where was advaunced hye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A stately siege of soveraine majestye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thereon satt a woman, gorgeous gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And richly cladd in robes of royaltye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That never earthly Prince in such aray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His glory did enhaunce, and pompous pryde display.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her face right wondrous faire did seeme to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her broad beauties beam great brightnes threw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through the dim shade, that all men might it see:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was not that same her owne native hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wrought by art and counterfetted shew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereby more lovers unto her to call:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nath’lesse most hevenly faire in deed and vew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She by creation was, till she did fall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thenceforth she sought for helps to cloke her crime withall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There, as in glistring glory she did sitt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She held a great gold chaine ylincked well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose upper end to highest heven was knitt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lower part did reach to lowest Hell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all that preace did rownd about her swell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To catchen hold of that long chaine, thereby</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To climbe aloft, and others to excell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was Ambition, rash desire to sty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every linck thereof a step of dignity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Some thought to raise themselves to high degree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By riches and unrighteous reward;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some by close shouldring; some by flatteree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Others through friendes; others for base regard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all by wrong waies for themselves prepard:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those that were up themselves kept others low;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those that were low themselves held others hard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne suffred them to ryse or greater grow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But every one did strive his fellow downe to throw.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which whenas Guyon saw, he gan inquire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What meant that preace about that Ladies throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And what she was that did so high aspyre?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him Mammon answered; “That goodly one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom all that folke with such contention</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe flock about, my deare, my daughter is:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Honour and dignitie from her alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Derived are, and all this worldes blis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which ye men doe strive; few gett, but many mis:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And fayre Philotime she rightly hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fairest wight that wonneth under skie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that this darksom neather world her light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth dim with horror and deformity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Worthie of heven and hye felicitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whence the gods have her for envy thrust:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, sith thou hast found favour in mine eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy spouse I will her make, if that thou lust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she may thee advance for works and merits just.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Gramercy, Mammon,” (said the gentle knight)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“For so great grace and offred high estate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But I, that am fraile flesh and earthly wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unworthy match for such immortall mate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My selfe well wote, and mine unequall fate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And were I not, yet is my trouth yplight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And love avowd to other Lady late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to remove the same I have no might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To chaunge love causelesse is reproch to warlike knight.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Mammon emmoved was with inward wrath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, forcing it to fayne, him forth thence ledd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through griesly shadowes by a beaten path,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into a gardin goodly garnished</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hearbs and fruits, whose kinds mote not be redd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not such as earth out of her fruitfull woomb</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throwes forth to men, sweet and well savored,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But direfull deadly black, both leafe and bloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fitt to adorne the dead, and deck the drery toombe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There mournfull Cypresse grew in greatest store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And trees of bitter Gall, and Heben sad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dead sleeping Poppy, and black Hellebore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cold Coloquintida, and Tetra mad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mortall Samnitis, and Cicuta bad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which th’unjust Atheniens made to dy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wise Socrates; who, thereof quaffing glad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pourd out his life and last Philosophy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the fayre Critias, his dearest Belamy!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Gardin of Proserpina this hight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the midst thereof a silver seat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a thick Arber goodly over-dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which she often usd from open heat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her selfe to shroud, and pleasures to entreat:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Next thereunto did grow a goodly tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With braunches broad dispredd and body great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Clothed with leaves, that none the wood mote see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And loaden all with fruit as thick as it might bee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Their fruit were golden apples glistring bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That goodly was their glory to behold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On earth like never grew, ne living wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like ever saw, but they from hence were sold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For those which Hercules, with conquest bold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Got from great Atlas daughters, hence began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And planted there did bring forth fruit of gold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And those with which th’Eubœan young man wan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swift Atalanta, when through craft he her out ran.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Here also sprong that goodly golden fruit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which Acontius got his lover trew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom he had long time sought with fruitlesse suit:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here eke that famous golden Apple grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which emongst the gods false Ate threw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which th’Idæan Ladies disagreed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till partiall Paris dempt it Venus dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And had of her fayre Helen for his meed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That many noble Greekes and Trojans made to bleed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The warlike Elfe much wondred at this tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So fayre and great that shadowed all the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his broad braunches, laden with rich fee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did stretch themselves without the utmost bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of this great gardin, compast with a mound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which over-hanging, they themselves did steepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In a blacke flood, which flow’d about it round.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is the river of Cocytus deepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which full many soules do endlesse wayle and weepe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which to behold he clomb up to the bancke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And looking downe saw many damned wightes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In those sad waves, which direfull deadly stancke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Plonged continually of cruell Sprightes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with their piteous cryes, and yelling shrightes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They made the further shore resounden wide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emongst the rest of those same ruefull sightes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One cursed creature he by chaunce espide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That drenched lay full deepe under the Garden side.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Deepe was he drenched to the upmost chin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet gaped still as coveting to drinke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the cold liquor which he waded in;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stretching forth his hand did often thinke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To reach the fruit which grew upon the brincke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But both the fruit from hand, and flood from mouth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did fly abacke, and made him vainely swincke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles he sterv’d with hunger, and with drouth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He daily dyde, yet never throughly dyen couth.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The knight, him seeing labour so in vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ask’t who he was, and what he ment thereby?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, groning deepe, thus answerd him againe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Most cursed of all creatures under skye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lo! Tantalus, I here tormented lye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whom high Jove wont whylome feasted bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lo! here I now for want of food doe dye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, if that thou be such as I thee see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of grace I pray thee, give to eat and drinke to mee!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Nay, nay, thou greedy Tantalus,” (quoth he)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Abide the fortune of thy present fate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto all that live in high degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ensample be of mind intemperate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To teach them how to use their present state.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan the cursed wretch alowd to cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Accusing highest Jove and gods ingrate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke blaspheming heaven bitterly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As author of unjustice, there to let him dye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He lookt a litle further, and espyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another wretch, whose carcas deepe was drent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within the river, which the same did hyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But both his handes, most filthy feculent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above the water were on high extent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And faynd to wash themselves incessantly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet nothing cleaner were for such intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But rather fowler seemed to the eye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So lost his labour vaine and ydle industry.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The knight him calling asked who he was?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, lifting up his head, him answerd thus;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“I Pilate am, the falsest Judge, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And most unjust; that, by unrighteous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wicked doome, to Jewes despiteous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Delivered up the Lord of life to dye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did acquite a murdrer felonous;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles my handes I washt in purity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whiles my soule was soyld with fowle iniquity.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Infinite moe tormented in like paine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He there beheld, too long here to be told:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne Mammon would there let him long remayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For terrour of the tortures manifold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which the damned soules he did behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But roughly him bespake: “Thou fearefull foole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why takest not of that same fruite of gold?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne sittest downe on that same silver stoole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To rest thy weary person in the shadow coole?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All which he did to do him deadly fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In frayle intemperaunce through sinfull bayt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which if he inclyned had at all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That dreadfull feend, which did behinde him wayt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would him have rent in thousand peeces strayt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he was wary wise in all his way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And well perceived his deceiptfull sleight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne suffred lust his safety to betray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So goodly did beguile the Guyler of his pray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now he has so long remained theare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That vitall powres gan wexe both weake and wan</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For want of food and sleepe, which two upbeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like mightie pillours, this frayle life of man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none without the same enduren can:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For now three dayes of men were full outwrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since he this hardy enterprize began:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forthy great Mammon fayrely he besought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the world to guyde him backe, as he him brought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The God, though loth, yet was constraynd t’obay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For lenger time then that no living wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Below the earth might suffred be to stay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So backe againe him brought to living light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all so soone as his enfeebled spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan sucke this vitall ayre into his brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As overcome with too exceeding might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The life did flit away out of her nest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all his sences were with deadly fit opprest.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-8" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Sir Guyon, laid in swowne, is by</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Acrates sonnes despoyld,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whom Arthur soone hath reskewed</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And Paynim brethren foyld.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And is there care in heaven? And is there love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In heavenly spirits to these creatures bace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That may compassion of their evilles move?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There is: else much more wretched were the cace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of men then beasts. But O! th’exceeding grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of highest God that loves his creatures so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all his workes with mercy doth embrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That blessed Angels he sends to and fro,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To serve to wicked man, to serve his wicked foe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>How oft do they their silver bowers leave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To come to succour us that succour want!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How oft do they with golden pineons cleave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The flitting skyes, like flying Pursuivant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against fowle feendes to ayd us militant!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They for us fight, they watch and dewly ward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And their bright Squadrons round about us plant;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all for love, and nothing for reward.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O! why should hevenly God to men have such regard?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>During the while that Guyon did abide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mamons house, the Palmer, whom whyleare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That wanton Mayd of passage had denide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By further search had passage found elsewhere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, being on his way, approched neare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where Guyon lay in traunce; when suddeinly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He heard a voyce that called lowd and cleare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Come hither! hither! O, come hastily!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all the fields resounded with the ruefull cry.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Palmer lent his eare unto the noyce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet who called so importunely:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Againe he heard a more efforced voyce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That bad him come in haste. He by and by</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His feeble feet directed to the cry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to that shady delve him brought at last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where Mammon earst did sunne his threasury;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There the good Guyon he found slumbring fast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In senceles dreame; which sight at first him sore aghast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Beside his head there satt a faire young man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of wondrous beauty and of freshest yeares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose tender bud to blossome new began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And florish faire above his equall peares:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His snowy front, curled with golden heares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like Phœbus face adornd with sunny rayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Divinely shone; and two sharpe winged sheares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Decked with diverse plumes, like painted Jayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were fixed at his backe to cut his ayery wayes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like as Cupido on Idæan hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When having laid his cruell bow away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mortall arrowes, wherewith he doth fill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The world with murdrous spoiles and bloody pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his faire mother he him dights to play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his goodly sisters, Graces three:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Goddesse, pleased with his wanton play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Suffers her selfe through sleepe beguild to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whiles the other Ladies mind theyr mery glee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when the Palmer saw, abasht he was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through fear and wonder that he nought could say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till him the childe bespoke; “Long lackt, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath bene thy faithfull aide in hard assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles deadly fitt thy pupill doth dismay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behold this heavy sight, thou reverend Sire!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But dread of death and dolor doe away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For life ere long shall to her home retire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he that breathlesse seems shal corage both respire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The charge, which God doth unto me arrett,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his deare safety, I to thee commend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet will I not forgoe, ne yet forgett</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The care thereof my selfe unto the end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But evermore him succour, and defend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against his foe and mine: watch thou, I pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For evill is at hand him to offend.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So having said, eftsoones he gan display</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His painted nimble wings, and vanisht quite away,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Palmer seeing his lefte empty place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his slow eies beguiled of their sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Woxe sore affraid, and standing still a space</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gaz’d after him, as fowle escapt by flight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last, him turning to his charge behight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With trembling hand his troubled pulse gan try;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where finding life not yet dislodged quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He much rejoyst, and courd it tenderly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As chicken newly hatcht, from dreaded destiny.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last he spide where towards him did pace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two Paynim knights al armd as bright as skie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And them beside an aged Sire did trace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And far before a light-foote Page did flie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That breathed strife and troublous enmitie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those were the two sonnes of Acrates old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, meeting earst with Archimago slie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Foreby that idle strond, of him were told</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he which earst them combatted was Guyon bold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which to avenge on him they dearly vowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where ever that on ground they mote him find:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">False Archimage provokte their corage prowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stryful Atin in their stubborne mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Coles of contention and whot vengeaunce tind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now bene they come whereas the Palmer sate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Keeping that slombred corse to him assind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well knew they both his person, sith of late</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With him in bloody armes they rashly did debate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when Pyrochles saw, inflam’d with rage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sire he fowl bespake: “Thou dotard vile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with thy brutenesse shendst thy comely age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abandon soone, I read, the caytive spoile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that same outcast carcas, that erewhile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made it selfe famous through false trechery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And crownd his coward crest with knightly stile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Loe! where he now inglorious doth lye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To proove he lived il that did thus fowly dye.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom the Palmer fearlesse answered:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Certes, Sir knight, ye bene too much to blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus for to blott the honor of the dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with fowle cowardize his carcas shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose living handes immortalizd his name.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vile is the vengeaunce on the ashes cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And envy base to barke at sleeping fame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was never wight that treason of him told:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your self his prowesse prov’d, and found him fiers and bold.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then sayd Cymochles: “Palmer, thou doest dote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne canst of prowesse ne of knighthood deeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save as thou seest or hearst. But well I wote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of his puissaunce tryall made extreeme:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet gold al is not that doth golden seeme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne all good knights that shake well speare and shield.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The worth of all men by their end esteeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then dew praise or dew reproch them yield;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bad therefore I him deeme that thus lies dead on field.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Good or bad,” gan his brother fiers reply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“What doe I recke, sith that he dide entire?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or what doth his bad death now satisfy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The greedy hunger of revenging yre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith wrathfull hand wrought not her owne desire?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet since no way is lefte to wreake my spight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I will him reave of armes, the victors hire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of that shield, more worthy of good knight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For why should a dead dog be deckt in armour bright?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Fayr Sir,” said then the Palmer suppliaunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“For knighthoods love doe not so fowle a deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne blame your honor with so shamefull vaunt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of vile revenge. To spoile the dead of weed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is sacrilege, and doth all sinnes exceed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But leave these relicks of his living might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To decke his herce, and trap his tomb-blacke steed.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“What herce or steed” (said he) “should he have dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But be entombed in the raven or the kight?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that, rude hand upon his shield he laid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And th’other brother gan his helme unlace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both fiercely bent to have him disaraid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that they spyde where towards them did pace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An armed knight, of bold and bounteous grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose squire bore after him an heben launce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And coverd shield. Well kend him so far space</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th’enchaunter by his armes and amenaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When under him he saw his Lybian steed to praunce;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And to those brethren sayd; “Rise, rise by live,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto batteil doe your selves addresse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For yonder comes the prowest knight alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Prince Arthur, flowre of grace and nobilesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hath to Paynim knights wrought gret distresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thousand Sar’zins fowly donne to dye.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That word so deepe did in their harts impresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That both eftsoones upstarted furiously,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gan themselves prepare to batteill greedily.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But fiers Pyrochles, lacking his owne sword,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The want thereof now greatly gan to plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Archimage besought, him that afford</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he had brought for Braggadochio vaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“So would I,” (said th’enchaunter) “glad and faine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beteeme to you this sword, you to defend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ought that els your honour might maintaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that this weapons powre I well have kend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be contrary to the worke which ye intend:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“For that same knights owne sword this is, of yore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Merlin made by his almightie art</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that his noursling, when he knighthood swore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith to doen his foes eternall smart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The metall first he mixt with Medæwart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That no enchauntment from his dint might save;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then it in flames of Aetna wrought apart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seven times dipped in the bitter wave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of hellish Styx, which hidden vertue to it gave.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The vertue is, that nether steele nor stone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The stroke thereof from entraunce may defend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever may be used by his fone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne forst his rightful owner to offend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever will it breake, ne ever bend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherefore <em>Morddure</em> it rightfully is hight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In vaine therefore, Pyrochles, should I lend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The same to thee, against his lord to fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For sure yt would deceive thy labor and thy might.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Foolish old man,” said then the Pagan wroth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“That weenest words or charms may force withstond:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone shalt thou see, and then beleeve for troth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I can carve with this inchaunted brond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His Lords owne flesh.” Therewith out of his hond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That vertuous steele he rudely snatcht away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Guyons shield about his wrest he bond:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So ready dight fierce battaile to assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And match his brother proud in battailous aray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By this, that straunger knight in presence came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And goodly salued them; who nought againe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him answered, as courtesie became;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with sterne lookes, and stomachous disdaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gave signes of grudge and discontentment vaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, turning to the Palmer, he gan spy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where at his feet, with sorrowfull demayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And deadly hew, an armed corse did lye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In whose dead face he redd great magnanimity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sayd he then to the Palmer: “Reverend Syre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What great misfortune hath betidd this knight?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or did his lire her fatall date expyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or did he fall by treason, or by fight?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How ever, sure I rew his pitteous plight.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Not one, nor other,” sayd the Palmer grave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Hath him befalne; but cloudes of deadly night</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A while his heavy eylids cover’d have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all his sences drowned in deep sencelesse wave:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Which those his cruell foes, that stand hereby,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Making advauntage, to revenge their spight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would him disarme and treaten shamefully;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unworthie usage of redoubted knight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But you, faire Sir, whose honourable sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth promise hope of helpe and timely grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mote I beseech to succour his sad plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by your powre protect his feeble cace?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First prayse of knighthood is fowle outrage to deface.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Palmer,” (said he) “no knight so rude, I weene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As to doen outrage to a sleeping ghost;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne was there ever noble corage seene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in advauntage would his puissaunce bost:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Honour is least where oddes appeareth most.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May bee, that better reason will aswage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rash revengers heat. Words, well dispost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have secrete powre t’appease inflamed rage:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If not, leave unto me thy knights last patronage.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho, turning to those brethren, thus bespoke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Ye warlike payre, whose valorous great might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It seemes, just wronges to vengeaunce doe provoke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wreake your wrath on this dead seeming knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mote ought allay the storme of your despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And settle patience in so furious heat?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not to debate the chalenge of your right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But for his carkas pardon I entreat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom fortune hath already laid in lowest seat.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom Cymochles said; “For what art thou,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That mak’st thy selfe his dayes-man, to prolong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The vengeaunce prest? Or who shall let me now</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On this vile body from to wreak my wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And make his carkas as the outcast dong?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why should not that dead carrion satisfye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The guilt which, if he lived had thus long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His life for dew revenge should deare abye?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The trespass still doth live, albee the person dye.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Indeed,” then said the Prince, “the evill donne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dyes not, when breath the body first doth leave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But from the grandsyre to the Nephewes sonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all his seede the curse doth often cleave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till vengeaunce utterly the guilt bereave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So streightly God doth judge. But gentle Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That doth against the dead his hand upheave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His honour staines with rancour and despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And great disparagment makes to his former might.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Pyrochles gan reply the second tyme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to him said: “Now, felon, sure I read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How that thou art partaker of his cryme:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore, by Termagaunt thou shalt be dead.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that his hand, more sad then lomp of lead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uplifting high, he weened with Morddure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His owne good sword Morddure, to cleave his head.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The faithfull steele such treason no’uld endure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, swarving from the marke, his Lordes life did assure.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet was the force so furious and so fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That horse and man it made to reele asyde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nath’lesse the Prince would not forsake his sell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For well of yore he learned had to ryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But full of anger fiersly to him cryde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“False traitour! miscreaunt! thou broken hast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The law of armes to strike foe undefide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But thou thy treasons fruit, I hope, shalt taste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right sowre, and feele the law the which thou hast defast.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that his balefull speare he fiercely bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the Pagans brest, and therewith thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His cursed life out of her lodge have rent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But ere the point arrived where it ought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seven fold shield, which he from Guyon brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He cast between to ward the bitter stownd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through all those foldes the steelehead passage wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through his shoulder perst; wherwith to ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He groveling fell, all gored in his gushing wound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when his brother saw, fraught with great griefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wrath, he to him leaped furiously,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fowly saide: “By Mahoune, cursed thiefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That direfull stroke thou dearely shalt aby:”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, hurling up his harmefull blade on hy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Smote him so hugely on his haughtie crest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from his saddle forced him to fly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Els mote it needes downe to his manly brest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have cleft his head in twaine, and life thence dispossest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now was the Prince in daungerous distresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wanting his sword when he on foot should fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His single speare could doe him small redresse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against two foes of so exceeding might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The least of which was match for any knight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now the other, whom he earst did daunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had reard him selfe againe to cruel fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Three times more furious and more puissaunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unmindfull of his wound, of his fate ignoraunt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So both attonce him charge on either syde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hideous strokes and importable powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That forced him his ground to traverse wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wisely watch to ward that deadly stowre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For in his shield, as thicke as stormie showre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their strokes did raine: yet did he never quaile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne backward shrinke, but as a stedfast towre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom foe with double battry doth assaile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Them on her bulwarke beares, and bids them nought availe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So stoutly he withstood their strong assay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that at last, when he advantage spyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His poynant speare he thrust with puissant sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At proud Cymochles, whiles his shield was wyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That through his thigh the mortall steele did gryde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He, swarving with the force, within his flesh</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did breake the launce, and let the head abyde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the wound the red blood flowed fresh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That underneath his feet soone made a purple plesh.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Horribly then he gan to rage and rayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cursing his Gods, and him selfe damning deepe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Als when his brother saw the red blood rayle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adowne so fast, and all his armour steepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For very felnesse lowd he gan to weepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said; “Caytive, curse on thy cruell hond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That twise hath spedd; yet shall it not thee keepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the third brunt of this my fatall brond:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo! where the dreadfull Death behynd thy backe doth stond.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that he strooke, and thother strooke withall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nothing seemd mote beare so monstrous might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The one upon his covered shield did fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And glauncing downe would not his owner byte;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But thother did upon his troncheon smyte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which hewing quite asunder, further way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It made, and on his hacqueton did lyte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which dividing with importune sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It seizd in his right side, and there the dint did stay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Wyde was the wound, and a large lukewarme flood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Red as the Rose, thence gushed grievously;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That when the Paynym spyde the streaming blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gave him great hart and hope of victory.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On th’other side, in huge perplexity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Prince now stood, having his weapon broke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nought could he hurt, but still at warde did ly:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet with his troncheon he so rudely stroke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cymochles twise, that twise him forst his foot revoke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when the Palmer saw in such distresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir Guyon’s sword he lightly to him raught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said; “Fayre Sonne, great God thy right hand blesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To use that sword so well as he it ought!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Glad was the knight, and with fresh courage fraught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When as againe he armed felt his hond:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then like a Lyon, which hath long time saught</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His robbed whelpes, and at the last them fond</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Emongst the shepeheard swaynes, then wexeth wood and yond:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So fierce he laid about him, and dealt blowes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On either side, that neither mayle could hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne shield defend the thunder of his throwes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now to Pyrochles many strokes he told;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eft to Cymochles twise so many fold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, backe againe turning his busie hond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them both atonce compeld with courage bold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To yield wide way to his hart-thrilling brond;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though they both stood stiffe, yet could not both withstond.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As salvage Bull, whom two fierce mastives bayt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When rancour doth with rage him once engore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forgets with wary warde them to awayt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with his dreadfull hornes them drives afore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or flings aloft, or treades downe in the flore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Breathing out wrath, and bellowing disdaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the forest quakes to heare him rore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So rag’d Prince Arthur twixt his foemen twaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That neither could his mightie puissaunce sustaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But ever at Pyrochles when he smitt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Who Guyons shield cast ever him before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereon the Faery Queenes pourtract was writt,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His hand relented and the stroke forbore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his deare hart the picture gan adore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which oft the Paynim sav’d from deadly stowre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But him henceforth the same can save no more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For now arrived is his fatall howre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That no’te avoyded be by earthly skill or powre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For when Cymochles saw the fowle reproch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which them appeached, prickt with guiltie shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And inward griefe, he fiercely gan approch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Resolv’d to put away that loathly blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or dye with honour and desert of fame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on the haubergh stroke the Prince so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That quite disparted all the linked frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pierced to the skin, but bit no more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet made him twise to reele, that never moov’d afore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whereat renfierst with wrath and sharp regret,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He stroke so hugely with his borrowd blade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it empierst the Pagans burganet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, cleaving the hard steele, did deepe invade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into his head, and cruell passage made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quite through his brayne. He, tombling downe on ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Breathd out his ghost, which, to th’infernall shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fast flying, there eternall torment found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all the sinnes wherewith his lewd life did abound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which, when his german saw, the stony feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ran to his hart, and all his sence dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne thenceforth life ne corage did appeare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But as a man whom hellish feendes have frayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long trembling still he stoode: at last thus sayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Traytour, what hast thou doen? How ever may</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy cursed hand so cruelly have swayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against that knight! Harrow and well away!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After so wicked deede why liv’st thou lenger day?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that all desperate, as loathing light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with revenge desyring soone to dye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Assembling all his force and utmost might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his owne swerd he fierce at him did flye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strooke, and foynd, and lasht outrageously,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withouten reason or regard. Well knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Prince, with pacience and sufferaunce sly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So hasty heat soone cooled to subdew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tho, when this breathlesse woxe, that batteil gan renew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when a windy tempest bloweth hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nothing may withstand his stormy stowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The clowdes, as thinges affrayd, before him flye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all so soone as his outrageous powre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is layd, they fiercely then begin to showre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, as in scorne of his spent stormy spight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now all attonce their malice forth do poure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So did Prince Arthur beare himselfe in fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And suffred rash Pyrochles waste his ydle might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last, when as the Sarazin perceiv’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How that straunge sword refusd to serve his neede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when he stroke most strong the dint deceiv’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He flong it from him; and, devoyd of dreed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon him lightly leaping without heed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Twixt his two mighty armes engrasped fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thinking to overthrowe and downe him tred:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But him in strength and skill the Prince surpast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And through his nimble sleight did under him down cast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nought booted it the Paynim then to strive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For as a Bittur in the Eagles clawe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That may not hope by flight to scape alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still waytes for death with dread and trembling aw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So he, now subject to the victours law,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did not once move, nor upward cast his eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For vile disdaine and rancour, which did gnaw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His hart in twaine with sad melancholy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As one that loathed life, and yet despysd to dye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But full of princely bounty and great mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Conquerour nought cared him to slay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But casting wronges and all revenge behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More glory thought to give life then decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sayd; “Paynim, this is thy dismall day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet if thou wilt renounce thy miscreaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And my trew liegeman yield thy selfe for ay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Life will I graunt thee for thy valiaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all thy wronges will wipe out of my sovenaunce.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Foole!” (sayd the Pagan) “I thy gift defye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But use thy fortune as it doth befall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And say, that I not overcome doe dye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in despight of life for death doe call.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wroth was the Prince, and sory yet withall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he so wilfully refused grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet sith his fate so cruelly did fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His shining Helmet he gan soone unlace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And left his headlesse body bleeding all the place.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By this Sir Guyon from his traunce awakt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Life having maystered her sencelesse foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And looking up, whenas his shield he lakt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sword saw not, he wexed wondrous woe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when the Palmer, whom he long ygoe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had lost, he by him spyde, right glad he grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saide; “Deare sir, whom wandring to and fro</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I long have lackt, I joy thy face to vew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Firme is thy faith, whom daunger never fro me drew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But read, what wicked hand hath robbed mee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of my good sword and shield?” The Palmer glad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With so fresh hew uprysing him to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him answered: “Fayre sonne, be no whit sad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For want of weapons; they shall soone be had.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So gan he to discourse the whole debate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which that straunge knight for him sustained had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And those two Sarazins confounded late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose carcases on ground were horribly prostrate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when he heard, and saw the tokens trew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His hart with great affection was embayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the Prince, bowing with reverence dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As to the patrone of his life, thus sayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“My Lord, my liege, by whose most gratious ayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I live this day, and see my foes subdewd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What may suffice to be for meede repayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of so great graces as ye have me shewd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to be ever bound”⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom the Infant thus; “Fayre Sir, what need</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Good turnes be counted as a servile bond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bind their dooers to receive their meed?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are not all knightes by oath bound to withstond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oppressours powre by armes and puissant hond?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Suffise that I have done my dew in place.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So goodly purpose they together fond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of kindnesse and of courteous aggrace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whiles false Archimage and Atin fled apace.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-9" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The house of Temperaunce, in which</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Doth sober Alma dwell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Besieged of many foes, whom straunger</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Knightes to flight compell.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Of all Gods workes which doe this worlde adorne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There is no one more faire and excellent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then is mans body, both for powre and forme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles it is kept in sober government;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But none then it more fowle and indecent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Distempred through misrule and passions bace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It growes a Monster, and incontinent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth loose his dignity and native grace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold, who list, both one and other in this place.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>After the Paynim brethren conquer’d were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Briton Prince recov’ring his stolne sword,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Guyon his lost shield, they both yfere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth passed on their way in fayre accord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till him the Prince with gentle court did bord:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Sir knight, mote I of you this court’sy read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet why on your shield, so goodly scord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beare ye the picture of that Ladies head?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full lively is the semblaunt, though the substance dead.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Fayre Sir,” (sayd he) “if in that picture dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such life ye read, and vertue in vaine shew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What mote ye weene, if the trew lively-head</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that most glorious visage ye did vew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yf the beauty of her mind ye knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is, her bountie, and imperiall powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thousand times fairer then her mortall hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O! how great wonder would your thoughts devoure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And infinite desire into your spirite poure!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“She is the mighty Queene of Faery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose faire retraitt I in my shield doe beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee is the flowre of grace and chastity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throughout the world, renowmed far and neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My liefe, my liege, my Soveraine, my deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose glory shineth as the morning starre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with her light the earth enlumines cleare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far reach her mercies, and her praises farre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As well in state of peace, as puissaunce in warre.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thrise happy man,” (said then the Briton knight)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Whom gracious lott and thy great valiaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have made thee soldier of that Princesse bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with her bounty and glad countenaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth blesse her servaunts, and them high advaunce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How may straunge knight hope ever to aspire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By faithfull service and meete amenaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto such blisse? sufficient were that hire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For losse of thousand lives, to die at her desire.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Said Guyon, “Noble Lord, what meed so great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or grace of earthly Prince so soveraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by your wondrous worth and warlike feat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye well may hope, and easely attaine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But were your will her sold to entertaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And numbred be mongst knights of Maydenhed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great guerdon, well I wote, should you remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in her favor high bee reckoned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Arthegall and Sophy now beene honored.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Certes,” (then said the Prince) “I God avow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sith I armes and knighthood first did plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My whole desire hath beene, and yet is now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To serve that Queene with al my powre and might.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seven times the Sunne, with his lamp-burning light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath walkte about the world, and I no lesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith of that Goddesse I have sought the sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet no where can her find: such happinesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heven doth to me envy, and fortune favourlesse.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Fortune, the foe of famous chevisaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seldom” (said Guyon) “yields to vertue aide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in her way throwes mischiefe and mischaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereby her course is stopt and passage staid:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But you, faire Sir, be not herewith dismaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But constant keepe the way in which ye stand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, were it not that I am els delaid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hard adventure which I have in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I labour would to guide you through al Faery land.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Gramercy Sir,” said he; “but mote I weete</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What straunge adventure doe ye now pursew?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perhaps my succour or advizement meete</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mote stead you much your purpose to subdew.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan Sir Guyon all the story shew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of false Acrasia, and her wicked wiles;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to avenge the Palmer him forth drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From Faery court. So talked they, the whiles</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They wasted had much way, and measurd many miles.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now faire Phoebus gan decline in haste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His weary wagon to the Westerne vale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whenas they spide a goodly castle, plaste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Foreby a river in a pleasaunt dale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which choosing for that evenings hospitale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They thither marcht: but when they came in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from their sweaty Coursers did avale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They found the gates fast barred long ere night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every loup fast lockt, as fearing foes despight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when they saw, they weened fowle reproch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was to them doen, their entraunce to forestall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that the Squire gan nigher to approch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wind his horne under the castle wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with the noise it shooke as it would fall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones forth looked from the highest spire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The watch, and lowd unto the knights did call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weete what they so rudely did require?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who gently answered, They entraunce did desire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Fly fly, good knights,” (said he) “fly fast away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If that your lives ye love, as meete ye should;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fly fast, and save your selves from neare decay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here may ye not have entraunce, though we would:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We would, and would againe, if that we could;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But thousand enemies about us rave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with long siege us in the castle hould.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seven yeares this wize they us besieged have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many good knights slaine that have us sought to save.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus as he spoke, loe! with outragious cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A thousand villeins rownd about them swarmd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the rockes and caves adjoyning nye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vile caitive wretches, ragged, rude, deformd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All threatning death, all in straunge manner armd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some with unweldy clubs, some with long speares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some rusty knifes, some staves in fier warmd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sterne was their looke; like wild amazed steares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Staring with hollow eies, and stiffe upstanding heares.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Fiersly at first those knights they did assayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And drove them to recoile; but when againe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They gave fresh charge, their forces gan to fayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unhable their encounter to sustaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For with such puissaunce and impetuous maine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those Champions broke on them, that forst them fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like scattered Sheepe, whenas the Shepherds swaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Lyon and a Tigre doth espye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With greedy pace forth rushing from the forest nye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A while they fled, but soone retournd againe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With greater fury then before was fownd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evermore their cruell Capitaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sought with his raskall routs t’enclose them rownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, overronne, to tread them to the grownd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But soone the knights with their bright burning blades</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Broke their rude troupes, and orders did confownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hewing and slashing at their idle shades;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For though they bodies seem, yet substaunce from them fades.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when a swarme of Gnats at eventide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the fennes of Allan doe arise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their murmuring small trompetts sownden wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles in the aire their clustring army flies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That as a cloud doth seeme to dim the skies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne man nor beast may rest, or take repast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For their sharpe wounds and noyous injuries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till the fierce Northerne wind with blustring blast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth blow them quite away, and in the Ocean cast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus when they had that troublous rout disperst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the castle gate they come againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And entraunce crav’d which was denied erst.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now when report of that their perlous paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And combrous conflict which they did sustaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came to the Ladies eare which there did dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee forth issewed with a goodly traine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Squires and Ladies equipaged well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And entertained them right fairely, as befell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Alma she called was; a virgin bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That had not yet felt Cupides wanton rage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was shee woo’d or many a gentle knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many a Lord of noble parentage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sought with her to lincke in marriage:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For shee was faire as faire mote ever bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the flowre now of her freshest age;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet full of grace and goodly modestee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That even heven rejoyced her sweete face to see.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In robe of lilly white she was arayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from her shoulder to her heele downe raught;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The traine whereof loose far behind her strayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Braunched with gold and perle most richly wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And borne of two faire Damsels which were taught</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That service well. Her yellow golden heare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was trimly woven and in tresses wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne other tire she on her head did weare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But crowned with a garland of sweete Rosiere.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Goodly shee entertaind those noble knights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And brought them up into her castle hall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where gentle court and gracious delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee to them made, with mildnesse virginall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shewing her selfe both wise and liberall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, when they rested had a season dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They her besought of favour speciall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that faire Castle to affoord them vew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shee graunted; and, them leading forth, the same did shew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>First she them led up to the Castle wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was so high as foe might not it clime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all so faire and fensible withall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not built of bricke, ne yet of stone and lime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But of thing like to that Ægyptian slime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof king Nine whilome built Babell towre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But O great pitty! that no lenger time</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So goodly workemanship should not endure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soone it must turne to earth; no earthly thing is sure.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The frame thereof seemd partly circulare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And part triangulare; O worke divine!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those two the first and last proportions are;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The one imperfect, mortall, fœminine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th’other immortall, perfect, masculine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And twixt them both a quadrate was the base,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proportiond equally by seven and nine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nine was the circle sett in heavens place:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All which compacted made a goodly Diapase.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therein two gates were placed seemly well:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The one before, by which all in did pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did th’other far in workmanship excell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For not of wood, nor of enduring bras,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But of more worthy substance fram’d it was:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doubly disparted, it did locke and close,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That when it locked none might thorough pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when it opened, no man might it close,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still open to their friendes, and closed to their foes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Of hewen stone the porch was fayrely wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stone more of valew, and more smooth and fine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Jett or Marble far from Ireland brought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over the which was cast a wandring vine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enchaced with a wanton yvie twine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And over it a fayre Portcullis hong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to the gate directly did incline</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With comely compasse and compacture strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nether unseemly short, nor yet exceeding long.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Within the Barbican a Porter sate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Day and night duely keeping watch and ward;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor wight nor word mote passe out of the gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in good order, and with dew regard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Utterers of secrets he from thence debard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bablers of folly, and blazers of cryme:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His larumbell might lowd and wyde be hard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When cause requyrd, but never out of time;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Early and late it rong, at evening and at prime.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And rownd about the porch on every syde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Twise sixteene warders satt, all armed bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In glistring steele, and strongly fortifyde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tall yeomen seemed they and of great might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And were enraunged ready still for fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By them as Alma passed with her guestes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They did obeysaunce, as beseemed right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then againe retourned to their restes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Porter eke to her did lout with humble gestes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thence she them brought into a stately Hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein were many tables fayre dispred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ready dight with drapets festivall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the viaundes should be ministred.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At th’upper end there sate, yclad in red</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Downe to the ground, a comely personage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in his hand a white rod menaged:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He Steward was, hight Diet; rype of age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in demeanure sober, and in counsell sage.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And through the Hall there walked to and fro</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A jolly yeoman, Marshall of the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose name was Appetite: he did bestow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both guestes and meate, when ever in they came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And knew them how to order without blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As him the Steward badd. They both attone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did dewty to their Lady, as became;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, passing by, forth ledd her guestes anone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the kitchin rowme, ne spard for nicenesse none.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It was a vaut ybuilt for great dispence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With many raunges reard along the wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And one great chimney, whose long tonnell thence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The smoke forth threw. And in the midst of all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There placed was a caudron wide and tall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a mightie fornace, burning whott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More whott then Aetn’, or flaming Mongiball;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For day and night it brent, ne ceased not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So long as any thing it in the caudron gott.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But to delay the heat, least by mischaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It might breake out and set the whole on fvre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There added was by goodly ordinaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An huge great payre of bellowes, which did styre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Continually, and cooling breath inspyre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About the Caudron many Cookes accoyld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hookes and ladles, as need did requyre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whyles the viaundes in the vessell boyld</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They did about their businesse sweat, and sorely toyld.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The maister Cooke was cald Concoction;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A carefull man, and full of comely guyse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The kitchin clerke, that hight Digestion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did order all th’Achates in seemely wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And set them forth, as well he could devise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rest had severall offices assynd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some to remove the scum as it did rise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Others to beare the same away did mynd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And others it to use according to his kynd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But all the liquour, which was fowle and waste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not good nor serviceable elles for ought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They in another great rownd vessell plaste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till by a conduit pipe it thence were brought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the rest, that noyous was and nought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By secret wayes, that none might it espy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was close convaid, and to the backgate brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That cleped was Port Esquiline, whereby</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was avoided quite, and throwne out privily.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which goodly order and great workmans skill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whenas those knightes beheld, with rare delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gazing wonder they their mindes did fill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For never had they seene so straunge a sight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence backe againe faire Alma led them right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soone into a goodly Parlour brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was with royall arras richly dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which was nothing pourtrahed nor wrought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not wrought nor pourtrahed, but easie to be thought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And in the midst thereof upon the floure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A lovely bevy of faire Ladies sate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Courted of many a jolly Paramoure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which them did in modest wise amate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And each one sought his Lady to aggrate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke emongst them litle Cupid playd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His wanton sportes, being retourned late</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From his fierce warres, and having from him layd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His cruel bow, wherewith he thousands hath dismayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Diverse delights they fownd them selves to please;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some song in sweet consort; some laught for joy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some plaid with strawes; some ydly satt at ease;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But other some could not abide to toy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All pleasaunce was to them griefe and annoy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This fround, that faund, the third for shame did blush,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another seemed envious or coy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another in her teeth did gnaw a rush;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But at these straungers presence every one did hush.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as the gracious Alma came in place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They all attonce out of their seates arose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to her homage made with humble grace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when the knights beheld, they gan dispose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Themselves to court, and each a damzell chose.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Prince by chaunce did on a Lady light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was right faire and fresh as morning rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But somwhat sad and solemne eke in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if some pensive thought constraind her gentle spright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In a long purple pall, whose skirt with gold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was fretted all about, she was arayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in her hand a Poplar braunch did hold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom the Prince in courteous maner sayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Gentle Madame, why beene ye thus dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And your faire beautie doe with sadnes spill?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lives any that you hath thus ill apayd?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or doen you love? or doen you lack your will?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What ever bee the cause, it sure beseemes you ill.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Fayre Sir,” said she, halfe in disdaineful wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“How is it that this mood in me ye blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in your selfe doe not the same advise?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him ill beseemes anothers fault to name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That may unwares bee blotted with the same:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pensive I yeeld I am, and sad in mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through great desire of glory and of fame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought, I weene, are ye therein behynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That have three years sought one, yet no where can her find.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Prince was inly moved at her speach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well weeting trew what she had rashly told;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet with faire semblaunt sought to hyde the breach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which chaunge of colour did perforce unfold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now seeming flaming whott, now stony cold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, turning soft aside, he did inquyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What wight she was that Poplar braunch did hold?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It answered was, her name was Prays-desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That by well doing sought to honour to aspyre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The whyles the Faery knight did entertayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another Damsell of that gentle crew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was right fayre and modest of demayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that too oft she chaung’d her native hew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Straunge was her tyre, and all her garment blew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Close rownd about her tuckt with many a plight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon her fist the bird, which shonneth vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And keepes in coverts close from living wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did sitt, as yet ashamd how rude Pan did her dight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So long as Guyon with her commoned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the grownd she cast her modest eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever and anone with rosy red</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bashfull blood her snowy cheekes did dye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her became, as polisht yvory</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which cunning Craftesman hand hath overlayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With fayre vermilion or pure Castory.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great wonder had the knight to see the mayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So straungely passioned, and to her gently said:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Fayre Damzell, seemeth by your troubled cheare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That either me too bold ye weene, this wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You to molest, or other ill to feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in the secret of your hart close lyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whence it doth, as cloud from sea, aryse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If it be I, of pardon I you pray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if ought else that I mote not devyse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I will, if please you it discure, assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To ease you of that ill, so wisely as I may.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She answerd nought, but more abasht for shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Held downe her head, the whiles her lovely face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The flashing blood with blushing did inflame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the strong passion mard her modest grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Guyon mervayld at her uncouth cace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till Alma him bespake: “Why wonder yee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Sir, at that which ye so much embrace?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She is the fountaine of your modestee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You shamefast are, but Shamefastnes it selfe is shee.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereat the Elfe did blush in privitee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And turnd his face away; but she the same</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dissembled faire, and faynd to oversee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus they awhile with court and goodly game</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Themselves did solace each one with his Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that great Lady thence away them sought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To vew her Castles other wondrous frame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Up to a stately Turret she them brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ascending by ten steps of Alabaster wrought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That Turrets frame most admirable was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like highest heaven compassed around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lifted high above this earthly masse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which it survewd as hils doen lower ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But not on ground mote like to this be found:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not that, which antique Cadmus whylome built</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Thebes, which Alexander did confound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor that proud towre of Troy, though richly guilt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From which young Hectors blood by cruell Greekes was spilt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The roofe hereof was arched over head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And deckt with flowers and herbars daintily:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two goodly Beacons, set in watches stead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therein gave light, and flamd continually;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For they of living fire most subtilly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were made, and set in silver sockets bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cover’d with lids deviz’d of substance sly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That readily they shut and open might.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O! who can tell the prayses of that makers might?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne can I tell, ne can I stay to tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This parts great workemanship and wondrous powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all this other worldes worke doth excell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And likest is unto that heavenly towre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That God hath built for his owne blessed bowre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therein were divers rowmes, and divers stages;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But three the chiefest and of greatest powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which there dwelt three honorable sages,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wisest men, I weene, that lived in their ages.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Not he, whom Greece, the Nourse of all good arts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By Phœbus doome the wisest thought alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might be compar’d to these by many parts:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor that sage Pylian syre, which did survive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Three ages, such as mortall men contrive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By whose advise old Priams cittie fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With these in praise of pollicies mote strive.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These three in these three rowmes did sondry dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And counselled faire Alma how to governe well.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The first of them could things to come foresee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The next could of thinges present best advize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The third things past could keep in memoree:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that no time nor reason could arize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that the same could one of these comprize.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For-thy the first did in the forepart sit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nought mote hinder his quicke prejudize:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He had a sharpe foresight and working wit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That never idle was, ne once would rest a whit.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His chamber was dispainted all within</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sondry colours, in the which were writ</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Infinite shapes of thinges dispersed thin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some such as in the world were never yit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne can devized be of mortall wit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some daily seene and knowen by their names,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as in idle fantasies do flit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Infernall Hags, Centaurs, feendes, Hippodames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Apes, Lyons, Aegles, Owles, fooles, lovers, children, Dames.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And all the chamber filled was with flyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which buzzed all about, and made such sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they encombred all mens eares and eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like many swarmes of Bees assembled round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After their hives with honny do abound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All those were idle thoughtes and fantasies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Devices, dreames, opinions unsound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shewes, visions, sooth-sayes, and prophesies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all that fained is, as leasings, tales, and lies.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Emongst them all sate he which wonned there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hight Phantastes by his nature trew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A man of yeares yet fresh, as mote appere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of swarth complexion, and of crabbed hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That him full of melancholy did shew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bent hollow beetle browes, sharpe staring eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That mad or foolish seemd: one by his vew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mote deeme him borne with ill-disposed skyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When oblique Saturne sate in th’house of agonyes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom Alma having shewed to her guestes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence brought them to the second rowme, whose wals</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were painted faire with memorable gestes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of famous Wisards; and with picturals</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Magistrates, of courts, of tribunals,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of commen-wealthes, of states, of pollicy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of lawes, of judgementes, and of decretals,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All artes, all science, all Philosophy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all that in the world was ay thought wittily.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Of those that rowme was full; and them among</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There sate a man of ripe and perfect age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who did them meditate all his life long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That through continuall practise and usage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He now was growne right wise and wondrous sage:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great pleasure had those straunger knightes to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His goodly reason and grave personage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That his disciples both desyrd to bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Alma thence them led to th’hindmost rowme of three.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That chamber seemed ruinous and old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therefore was removed far behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet were the wals, that did the same uphold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right firme and strong, though somwhat they declind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therein sat an old old man, halfe blind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all decrepit in his feeble corse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet lively vigour rested in his mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And recompenst them with a better scorse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weake body wel is chang’d for minds redoubled forse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This man of infinite remembraunce was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And things foregone through many ages held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he recorded still as they did pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne suffred them to perish through long eld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As all things els the which this world doth weld;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But laid them up in his immortall scrine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where they for ever incorrupted dweld:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The warres he well remembred of king Nine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of old Assaracus, and Inachus divine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The yeares of Nestor nothing were to his,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne yet Mathusalem, though longest liv’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he remembred both their infancis:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne wonder then, if that he were depriv’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of native strength now that he them surviv’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His chamber all was hangd about with rolls</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And old records from auncient times derivd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some made in books, some in long parchment scrolls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That were all worm-eaten and full of canker holes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Amidst them all he in a chaire was sett,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tossing and turning them withouten end;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But for he was unhable them to fett,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A litle boy did on him still attend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To reach, when ever he for ought did send;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oft when thinges were lost, or laid amis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That boy them sought and unto him did lend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore he Anamnestes cleped is;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that old man Eumnestes, by their propertis.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The knightes there entring did him reverence dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wondred at his endlesse exercise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then as they gan his Library to vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And antique Regesters for to avise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There chaunced to the Princes hand to rize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An auncient booke, hight <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Briton Moniments</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of this lands first conquest did devize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And old division into Regiments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till it reduced was to one mans governements.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sir Guyon chaunst eke on another booke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hight <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Antiquitee of Faery lond</i>:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which whenas he greedily did looke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th’ofspring of Elves and Faeryes there he fond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As it delivered was from hond to hond:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat they, burning both with fervent fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their countreys auncestry to understond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Crav’d leave of Alma and that aged sire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To read those bookes; who gladly graunted their desire.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-10" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>A chronicle of Briton Kings,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">From Brute to Uthers rayne.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And rolls of Elfin Emperours,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Till time of Gloriane.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Who now shall give unto me words and sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Equall unto this haughtie enterprise?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or who shall lend me wings, with which from ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My lowly verse may loftily arise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lift it selfe unto the highest skies?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More ample spirit then hitherto was wount</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here needes me, whiles the famous auncestries</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of my most dreaded Soveraigne I recount,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By which all earthly Princes she doth far surmount.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne under Sunne that shines so wide and faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence all that lives does borrow life and light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lives ought that to her linage may compaire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which though from earth it be derived right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet doth it selfe stretch forth to hevens hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the world with wonder overspred;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A labor huge, exceeding far my might.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How shall fraile pen, with feare disparaged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conceive such soveraine glory and great bountyhed?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Argument worthy of Mæonian quill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or rather worthy of great Phoebus rote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereon the ruines of great Ossa hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And triumphes of Phlegræan Jove, he wrote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the Gods admird his lofty note.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if some relish of that hevenly lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His learned daughters would to me report</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To decke my song withall, I would assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy name, O soveraine Queene! to blazon far away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thy name, O soveraine Queene! thy realme and race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From this renowmed Prince derived arre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who mightily upheld that royall mace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which now thou bear’st, to thee descended farre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From mighty kings and conquerours in warre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy fathers and great Grandfathers of old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose noble deeds above the Northerne starre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Immortall fame for ever hath enrold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in that old mans booke they were in order told.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The land which warlike Britons now possesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therein have their mighty empire raysd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In antique times was salvage wildernesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unpeopled, unmannurd, unprovd, unpraysd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne was it Island then, ne was it paysd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amid the ocean waves, ne was it sought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of merchants farre for profits therein praysd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But was all desolate, and of some thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By sea to have bene from the Celticke mayn-land brought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne did it then deserve a name to have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that the venturous Mariner that way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Learning his ship from those white rocks to save,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which all along the Southerne sea-coast lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Threatning unheedy wrecke and rash decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For safety that same his sea-marke made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And namd it <b>Albion</b>: But later day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Finding in it fit ports for fishers trade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gan more the same frequent, and further to invade.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But far in land a salvage nation dwelt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of hideous Giaunts, and halfe beastly men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That never tasted grace, nor goodnes felt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wild like beastes lurking in loathsome den,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And flying fast as Roebucke through the fen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All naked without shame or care of cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By hunting and by spoiling liveden;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of stature huge, and eke of corage bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That sonnes of men amazd their sternnesse to behold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But whence they sprong, or how they were begott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uneath is to assure; uneath to wene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That monstrous error, which doth some assott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Dioclesians fifty daughters shene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into this land by chaunce have driven bene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where, companing with feends and filthy Sprights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through vaine illusion of their lust unclene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They brought forth Geaunts, and such dreadful wights</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As far exceeded men in their immeasurd mights.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They held this land, and with their filthinesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Polluted this same gentle soyle long time;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That their owne mother loathd their beastlinesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gan abhorre her broods unkindly crime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All were they borne of her owne native slime:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until that Brutus, anciently deriv’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From roiall stocke of old Assaracs line,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Driven by fatall error here arriv’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And them of their unjust possession depriv’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But ere he had established his throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And spred his empire to the utmost shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He fought great batteils with his salvage fone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which he them defeated evermore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many Giaunts left on groning flore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That well can witnes yet unto this day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The westerne Hogh, besprincled with the gore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of mighty Goëmot, whome in stout fray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Corineus conquered, and cruelly did slay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And eke that ample Pitt, yet far renownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the large leape which Debon did compell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Coulin to make, being eight lugs of grownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the which retourning backe he fell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But those three monstrous stones doe most excell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which that huge sonne of hideous Albion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose father Hercules in Fraunce did quell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great Godmer threw, in fierce contention,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At bold Canutus; but of him was slaine anon.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In meed of these great conquests by them gott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Corineus had that Province utmost west</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To him assigned for his worthy lott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which of his name and memorable gest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He called Cornwaile, yet so called best;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Debons shayre was that is Devonshyre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Canute had his portion from the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which he cald Canutium, for his hyre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now Cantium, which Kent we comenly inquyre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus Brute this Realme unto his rule subdewd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And raigned long in great felicity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lov’d of his freends, and of his foes eschewd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He left three sonnes, his famous progeny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Borne of fayre Inogene of Italy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst whom he parted his imperiall state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Locrine left chiefe Lord of Britany.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last ripe age bad him surrender late</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His life, and long good fortune, unto finall fate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Locrine was left the soveraine Lord of all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Albanact had all the Northerne part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which of himselfe Albania he did call;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Camber did possesse the Westerne quart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Severne now from Logris doth depart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And each his portion peaceably enjoyd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne was there outward breach, nor grudge in hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That once their quiet government annoyd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But each his paynes to others profit still employd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Untill a nation straunge, with visage swart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And corage fierce that all men did affray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which through the world then swarmd in every part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And overflowd all countries far away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like Noyes great flood, with their importune sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This land invaded with like violence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did themselves through all the North display:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill that Locrine for his Realmes defence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did head against them make and strong munificence.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He them encountred, a confused rout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Foreby the River that whylome was hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The ancient Abus, where with courage stout</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He them defeated in victorious fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chaste so fiercely after fearefull flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That forst their chiefetain, for his safeties sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Their Chiefetain Humber named was aright,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the mighty streame him to betake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where he an end of batteill and of life did make.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The king retourned proud of victory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And insolent wox through unwonted ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shortly he forgot the jeopardy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which in his land he lately did appease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fell to vaine voluptuous disease:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He lov’d faire Ladie Estrild, leudly lov’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose wanton pleasures him too much did please,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That quite his hart from Guendolene remov’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Guendolene his wife, though alwaies faithful prov’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The noble daughter of Corinëus</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would not endure to bee so vile disdaind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, gathering force and corage valorous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Encountred him in batteill well ordaind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which him vanquisht she to fly constraind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she so fast pursewd, that him she tooke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And threw in bands, where he till death remaind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Als his faire Leman flying through a brooke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She overhent, nought moved with her piteous looke;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But both her selfe, and eke her daughter deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Begotten by her kingly Paramoure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The faire Sabrina, almost dead with feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She there attached, far from all succoure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The one she slew upon the present floure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the sad virgin, innocent of all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adowne the rolling river she did poure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which of her name now Severne men do call:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such was the end that to disloyall love did fall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then for her sonne, which she to Locrin bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Madan was young, unmeet the rule to sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In her owne hand the crowne she kept in store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till ryper years he raught and stronger stay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">During which time her powre she did display</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through all this Realme, the glory of her sex,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And first taught men a woman to obay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when her sonne to mans estate did wex,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She it surrendred, ne her selfe would lenger vex.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho Madan raignd, unworthie of his race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For with all shame that sacred throne he fild.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Next Memprise, as unworthy of that place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which being consorted with Manild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thirst of single kingdom him he kild.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Ebranck salved both their infamies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With noble deedes, and warreyd on Brunchild</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Henault, where yet of his victories</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brave moniments remaine, which yet that land envies.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>An happy man in his first dayes he was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And happy father of faire progeny:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all so many weekes as the yeare has,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So many children he did multiply:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which were twentie sonnes, which did apply</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their mindes to prayse and chevalrous desyre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those germans did subdew all Germany,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whom it hight; but in the end their Syre</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With foule repulse from Fraunce was forced to retyre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which blott his sonne succeeding in his seat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The second Brute, the second both in name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke in semblaunce of his puissaunce great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right well recur’d, and did away that blame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With recompence of everlasting fame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He with his victour sword first opened</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bowels of wide Fraunce, a forlorne Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And taught her first how to be conquered;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since which, with sondrie spoiles she hath been ransacked.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Let Scaldis tell, and let tell Hania,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And let the marsh of Esthambruges tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What colour were their waters that same day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the moore twixt Elversham and Dell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With blood of Henalois which therein fell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How oft that day did sad Brunchildis see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The greene shield dyde in dolorous vermell?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That not <i xml:lang="gd">Scuith guiridh</i> it mote seeme to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But rather <i xml:lang="cy">y scuith gogh</i>, signe of sad crueltee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His sonne, king Leill, by fathers labour long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enjoy’d an heritage of lasting peace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And built Cairleill, and built Cairleon strong.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Next Huddibras his realme did not encrease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But taught the land from wearie wars to cease:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose footsteps Bladud following, in artes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Exceld at Athens all the learned preace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whence he brought them to these salvage parts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with sweet science mollifide their stubborne harts.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ensample of his wondrous faculty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behold the boyling bathes at Cairbadon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which seeth with secret fire eternally,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in their entrailles, full of quick Brimston,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nourish the flames which they are warmd upon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to their people wealth they forth do well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And health to every forreyne nation:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet he at last, contending to excell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The reach of men, through flight into fond mischief fell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Next him king Leyr in happie peace long raynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But had no issue male him to succeed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But three faire daughters, which were well uptraind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In all that seemed fitt for kingly seed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst whom his realme he equally decreed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To have divided. Tho, when feeble age</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nigh to his utmost date he saw proceed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He cald his daughters, and with speeches sage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inquyrd, which of them most did love her parentage?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The eldest, Gonorill, gan to protest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she much more than her owne life him lov’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Regan greater love to him profest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then all the world, when ever it were proov’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Cordeill said she lov’d him as behoov’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose simple answere, wanting colours fayre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To paint it forth, him to displeasaunce moov’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in his crown he counted her no hayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But twixt the other twain his kingdom whole did shayre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So wedded th’one to Maglan king of Scottes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thother to the king of Cambria,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And twixt them shayrd his realme by equall lottes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But without dowre the wise Cordelia</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was sent to Aggannip of Celtica.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their aged Syre, thus eased of his crowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A private life ledd in Albania</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Gonorill, long had in great renowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That nought him griev’d to beene from rule deposed downe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But true it is that, when the oyle is spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The light goes out, and weeke is throwne away:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So, when he had resignd his regiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His daughter gan despise his drouping day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wearie wax of his continuall stay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho to his daughter Regan he repayrd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who him as first well used every way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when of his departure she despayrd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her bountie she abated, and his cheare empayrd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The wretched man gan then avise too late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That love is not where most it is profest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Too truely tryde in his extremest state.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last, resolv’d likewise to prove the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He to Cordelia him selfe addrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who with entyre affection him receav’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As for her Syre and king her seemed best;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after all an army strong she leav’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To war on those which him had of his realme bereav’d,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So to his crowne she him restord againe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which he dyde, made ripe for death by eld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after wild it should to her remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who peaceably the same long time did weld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all mens harts in dew obedience held;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that her sisters children, woxen strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through proud ambition against her rebeld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And overcommen kept in prison long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till weary of that wretched life her selfe she hong.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then gan the bloody brethren both to raine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But fierce Cundah gan shortly to envy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His brother Morgan, prickt with proud disdaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To have a pere in part of soverainty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And kindling coles of cruell enmity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Raisd warre, and him in batteill overthrew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence as he to those woody hilles did fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which hight of him Glamorgan, there him slew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then did he raigne alone, when he none equall knew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His sonne Rivall’his dead rowme did supply;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In whose sad time blood did from heaven rayne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Next great Gurgustus, then faire Cæcily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In constant peace their kingdomes did contayne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After whom Lago, and Kinmarke did rayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Gorbogud, till far in years he grew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then his ambitious sonnes unto them twayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arraught the rule, and from their father drew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stout Ferrex and sterne Porrex him in prison threw.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But O! the greedy thirst of royall crowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That knowes no kinred, nor regardes no right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stird Porrex up to put his brother downe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, unto him assembling forreigne might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made warre on him, and fell him selfe in fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose death t’avenge, his mother mercilesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most mercilesse of women, Wyden hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her other sonne fast sleeping did oppresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with most cruell hand him murdred pittilesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Here ended Brutus sacred progeny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which had seven hundred yeares this scepter borne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With high renowme and great felicity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The noble braunch from th’antique stocke was torne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through discord, and the roiall throne forlorne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thenceforth this Realme was into factions rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilest each of Brutus boasted to be borne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in the end was left no moniment</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Brutus, nor of Britons glorie auncient.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then up arose a man of matchlesse might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wondrous wit to menage high affayres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, stird with pitty of the stressed plight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of this sad realme, cut into sondry shayres</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By such as claymd themselves Brutes rightfull hayres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gathered the Princes of the people loose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To taken counsell of their common cares;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, with his wisedom won, him streight did choose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their king, and swore him fealty to win or loose.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then made he head against his enimies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Ymner slew of Logris miscreate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Ruddoc and proud Stater, both allyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This of Albany newly nominate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that of Cambry king confirmed late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He overthrew through his owne valiaunce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose countries he redus’d to quiet state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shortly brought to civile governaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now one, which earst were many made through variaunce.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then made he sacred lawes, which some men say</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were unto him reveald in vision;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which he freed the Traveilers high-way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Churches part, and Ploughmans portion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Restraining stealth and strong extortion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gratious Numa of great Britany;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For till his dayes, the chiefe dominion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By strength was wielded without pollicy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore he first wore crowne of gold for dignity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Donwallo dyde, (for what may live for ay?)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And left two sonnes, of pearelesse prowesse both,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sacked Rome too dearely did assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The recompence of their perjured oth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ransackt Greece wel tryde, when they were wroth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besides subjected France and Germany,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which yet their praises speake, all be they loth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And inly tremble at the memory</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Brennus and Belinus, kinges of Britany.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Next them did Gurgiunt, great Belinus sonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In rule succeede, and eke in fathers praise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He Easterland subdewd, and Denmarke wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of them both did foy and tribute raise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which was dew in his dead fathers daies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He also gave to fugitives of Spayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom he at sea found wandring from their waies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A seate in Ireland safely to remayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which they should hold of him, as subject to Britayne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>After him raigned Guitheline his hayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The justest man and trewest in his daies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who had to wife Dame Mertia the fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A woman worthy of immortall praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which for this Realme found many goodly layes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wholesome Statutes to her husband brought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her many deemd to have beene of the Fayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As was Aegerie that Numa tought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those yet of her be Mertian lawes both nam’d and thought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her sonne Sisillus after her did rayne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then Kimarus; and then Danius:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Next whom Morindus did the crowne sustayne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, had he not with wrath outrageous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cruell rancour dim’d his valorous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mightie deedes, should matched have the best:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As well in that same field victorious</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the forreine Morands he exprest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet lives his memorie, though carcas sleepe in rest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Five sonnes he left, begotten of one wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which successively by turnes did rayne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First Gorboman, a man of vertuous life;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Next Archigald, who for his proud disdayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deposed was from princedome soverayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pitteous Elidure put in his sted;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who shortly it to him restord agayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till by his death he it recovered:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Peridure and Vigent him disthronized.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In wretched prison long he did remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till they outraigned had their utmost date,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then therein reseized was againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ruled long with honorable state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till he surrendered Realme and life to fate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then all the sonnes of these five brethren raynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By dew successe, and all their Nephewes late;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even thrise eleven descents the crowne retaynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till aged Hely by dew heritage it gaynd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He had two sonnes, whose eldest, called Lud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Left of his life most famous memory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And endlesse moniments of his great good:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The ruin’d wals he did reædifye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Troynovant, gainst force of enimy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And built that gate which of his name is hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which he lyes entombed solemnly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He left two sonnes, too young to rule aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Androgeus and Tenantius, pictures of his might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whilst they were young, Cassibalane, their Eme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was by the people chosen in their sted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who on him tooke the roiall Diademe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And goodly well long time it governed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till the prowde Romanes him disquieted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And warlike Cæsar, tempted with the name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of this sweet Island never conquered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And envying the Britons blazed fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(O hideous hunger of dominion!) hither came.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet twise they were repulsed backe againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And twise renforst backe to their ships to fly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles with blood they all the shore did staine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the gray Ocean into purple dy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne had they footing found at last, perdie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had not Androgeus, false to native soyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And envious of Uncles soveraintie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Betrayd his countrey unto forreine spoyle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nought els but treason from the first this land did foyle.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So by him Cæsar got the victory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through great bloodshed and many a sad assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which himselfe was charged heavily</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of hardy Nennius, whom he yet did slay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But lost his sword, yet to be seene this day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thenceforth this land was tributarie made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T’ambitious Rome, and did their rule obay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till Arthur all that reckoning defrayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet oft the Briton kings against them strongly swayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Next him Tenantius raignd; them Kimbeline,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What time th’eternall Lord in fleshly slime</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enwombed was, from wretched Adams line</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To purge away the guilt of sinfull crime.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O joyous memorie of happy time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That heavenly grace so plenteously displayd!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(O too high ditty for my simple rime!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone after this the Romanes him warrayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that their tribute he refusd to let be payd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Good Claudius, that next was Emperour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An army brought, and with him batteile fought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which the king was by a Treachetour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disguised slaine, ere any thereof thought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet ceased not the bloody fight for ought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Arvirage his brothers place supplyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both in his armes and crowne, and by that draught</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did drive the Romanes to the weaker syde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they to peace agreed. So all was pacifyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Was never king more highly magnifide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor dredd of Romanes, then was Arvirage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which the Emperour to him allide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His daughter Genuiss’ in marriage:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet shortly he renounst the vassallage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Rome againe, who hither hastly sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vespasian, that with great spoile and rage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forwasted all, till Genuissa gent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Persuaded him to ceasse, and her lord to relent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He dide; and him succeeded Marius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who joy’d his dayes in great tranquillity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Coyll; and after him good Lucius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That first received Christianity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sacred pledge of Christes Evangely.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet true it is, that long before that day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hither came Joseph of Arimathy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who brought with him the holy grayle, they say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And preacht the truth; but since it greatly did decay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This good king shortly without issew dide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof great trouble in the kingdome grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That did her selfe in sondry parts divide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with her powre her owne selfe overthrew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilest Romanes daily did the weake subdew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which seeing, stout Bunduca up arose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And taking armes the Britons to her drew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With whom she marched streight against her foes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And them unwares besides the Severne did enclose.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There she with them a cruell batteill tryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not with so good successe as shee deserv’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By reason that the Captaines on her syde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Corrupted by Paulinus, from her swerv’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, such as were through former flight preserv’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gathering againe, her Host she did renew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with fresh corage on the victor servd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But being all defeated, save a few,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rather then fly, or be captiv’d, her selfe she slew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O famous moniment of womens prayse!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Matchable either to Semiramis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom antique history so high doth rayse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or to Hypsiphil’, or to Thomiris.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her Host two hundred thousand numbred is;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, whiles good fortune favoured her might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Triumphed oft against her enemis;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet, though overcome in haplesse fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shee triumphed on death, in enemies despight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her reliques Fulgent having gathered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fought with Severus, and him overthrew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet in the chace was slaine of them that fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So made them victors whome he did subdew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan Carausius tirannize anew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gainst the Romanes bent their proper powre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But him Allectus treacherously slew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tooke on him the robe of Emperoure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nath’lesse the same enjoyed but short happy howre:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For Asclepiodate him overcame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And left inglorious on the vanquisht playne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without or robe or rag to hide his shame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then afterwards he in his stead did raigne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But shortly was by Coyll in batteill slaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who after long debate, since Lucies tyme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was of the Britons first crownd Soveraine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan this Realme renew her passed prime:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He of his name Coylchester built of stone and lime.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when the Romanes heard, they hither sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Constantius, a man of mickle might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With whome king Coyll made an agreëment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to him gave for wife his daughter bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayre Helena, the fairest living wight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who in all godly thewes and goodly praise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did far excell, but was most famous hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For skil in Musicke of all in her daies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As well in curious instruments as cunning laies.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Of whom he did great Constantine begett,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who afterward was Emperour of Rome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which whiles absent he his mind did sett,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Octavius here lept into his roome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And it usurped by unrighteous doome:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he his title justifide by might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Slaying Traherne, and having overcome</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Romane legion in dreadfull fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So settled he his kingdome, and confirmd his right:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But wanting yssew male, his daughter deare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gave in wedlocke to Maximian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him with her made of his kingdome heyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who soone by meanes thereof the Empire wan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till murdred by the freends of Gratian.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan the Hunnes and Picts invade this land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">.During the raigne of Maximinian;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who dying left none heire them to withstand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that they overran all parts with easy hand.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The weary Britons, whose war-hable youth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was by Maximian lately ledd away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With wretched miseryes and woefull ruth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were to those Pagans made an open pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And daily spectacle of sad decay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whome Romane warres, which now fowr hundred yeares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And more had wasted, could no whit dismay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Til, by consent of Commons and of Peares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They crownd the second Constantine with joyous teares.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who having oft in batteill vanquished</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those spoylefull Picts, and swarming Easterlings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long time in peace his realme established,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet oft annoyd with sondry bordragings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of neighbour Scots, and forrein Scatterlings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which the world did in those dayes abound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to outbarre, with painefull pyonings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From sea to sea he heapt a mighty mound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which from Alcluid to Panwelt did that border bownd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Three sones he dying left, all under age;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By meanes whereof their uncle Vortigere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Usurpt the crowne during their pupillage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which th’Infants tutors gathering to feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them closely into Armorick did beare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For dread of whom, and for those Picts annoyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He sent to Germany straunge aid to reare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whence eftsoones arrived here three hoyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Saxons, whom he for his safety imployes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Two brethren were their Capitayns, which hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hengist and Horsus, well approv’d in warre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both of them men of renowmed might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who making vantage of their civile jarre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of those forreyners which came from farre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Grew great, and got large portions of land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in the Realme ere long they stronger arre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then they which sought at first their helping hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Vortiger have forst the kingdome to aband.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But by the helpe of Vortimere his sonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He is againe unto his rule restord;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Hengist, seeming sad for that was donne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Received is to grace and new accord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through his faire daughters face and flattring word.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone after which three hundred Lords he slew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of British blood, all sitting at his bord;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose dolefull moniments who list to rew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’eternall marks of treason may at Stonheng vew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By this the sonnes of Constantine, which fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ambrose and Uther, did ripe yeares attayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, here arriving, strongly challenged</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The crowne which Vortiger did long detayne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, flying from his guilt, by them was slayne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Hengist eke soon brought to shamefull death.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thenceforth Aurelius peaceably did rayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that through poyson stopped was his breath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So now entombed lies at Stoneheng by the heath.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>After him Uther, which Pendragon hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Succeeding⁠—There abruptly it did end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without full point, or other Cesure right;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if the rest some wicked hand did rend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or th’Author selfe could not at least attend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To finish it: that so untimely breach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Prince him selfe halfe seemed to offend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet secret pleasure did offence empeach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wonder of antiquity long stopt his speach.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last, quite ravisht with delight to heare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The royall Ofspring of his native land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cryde out; “Deare countrey! O! how dearely deare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ought thy remembraunce and perpetuall band</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be to thy foster Childe, that from thy hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did commun breath and nouriture receave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How brutish is it not to understand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How much to her we owe, that all us gave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That gave unto us all what ever good we have.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Guyon all this while his booke did read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne yet has ended; for it was a great</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ample volume, that doth far exceed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My leasure so long leaves here to repeat:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It told how first Prometheus did create</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A man, of many parts from beasts deryv’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then stole fire from heven to animate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His worke, for which he was by Jove depryv’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of life him self, and hart-strings of an Aegle ryv’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That man so made he called Elfe, to weet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quick, the first author of all Elfin kynd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, wandring through the world with wearie feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did in the gardins of Adonis fynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A goodly creature, whom he deemd in mynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be no earthly wight, but either Spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or Angell, th’authour of all woman kynd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore a Fay he her according hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of whom all Faeryes spring, and fetch their lignage right.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Of these a mighty people shortly grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And puissant kinges which all the world warrayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to them selves all Nations did subdew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The first and eldest, which that scepter swayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was Elfin; him all India obayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all that now America men call:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Next him was noble Elfinan, who laid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cleopolis foundation first of all:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Elfiline enclosd it with a golden wall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His sonne was Elfinell, who overcame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wicked Gobbelines in bloody field;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Elfant was of most renowmed fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who all of Christall did Panthea build:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Elfar, who two brethren gyauntes kild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The one of which had two heades, th’other three:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Elfinor, who was in magick skild;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He built by art upon the glassy See</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bridge of bras, whose sound hevens thunder seem’d to bee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He left three sonnes, the which in order raynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all their Ofspring, in their dew descents;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even seven hundred Princes, which maintaynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With mightie deedes their sondry governments;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That were too long their infinite contents</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here to record, ne much materiall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet should they be most famous moniments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And brave ensample, both of martiall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And civil rule, to kinges and states imperiall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>After all these Elficleos did rayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wise Elficleos, in great Majestie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who mightily that scepter did sustayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with rich spoyles and famous victorie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did high advaunce the crowne of Faery:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He left two sonnes, of which faire Elferon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The eldest brother, did untimely dy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose emptie place the mightie Oberon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doubly supplide, in spousall and dominion.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Great was his power and glorie over all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, him before, that sacred seate did fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That yet remaines his wide memoriall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He dying left the fairest Tanaquill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him to succeede therein, by his last will:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fairer and nobler liveth none this howre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne like in grace, ne like in learned skill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore they Glorian call that glorious flowre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long mayst thou, Glorian, live in glory and great powre!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Beguyld thus with delight of novelties,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And naturall desire of countryes state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So long they redd in those antiquities,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That how the time was fled they quite forgate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till gentle Alma, seeing it so late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perforce their studies broke, and them besought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To thinke how supper did them long awaite:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So halfe unwilling from their bookes them brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fayrely feasted as so noble knightes she ought.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-11" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The enimies of Temperaunce</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Besiege her dwelling place:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Prince Arthur them repelles, and fowle</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Maleger doth deface.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>What warre so cruel, or what siege so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As that which strong affections doe apply</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the forte of reason evermore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bring the sowle into captivity?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their force is fiercer through infirmity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the fraile flesh, relenting to their rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And exercise most bitter tyranny</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the partes brought into their bondage:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No wretchednesse is like to sinfull vellenage.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But in a body which doth freely yeeld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His partes to reasons rule obedient,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And letteth her that ought the scepter weeld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All happy peace and goodly government</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is setled there in sure establishment.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There Alma, like a virgin Queene most bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth florish in all beautie excellent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to her guestes doth bounteous banket dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Attempred goodly well for health and for delight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Early, before the Morne with cremosin ray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The windowes of bright heaven opened had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through which into the world the dawning day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might looke, that maketh every creature glad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uprose Sir Guyon, in bright armour clad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to his purposd journey him prepar’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With him the Palmer eke in habit sad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him selfe addrest to that adventure hard:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So to the rivers syde they both together far’d:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Where them awaited ready at the ford</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Ferriman, as Alma had behight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his well-rigged bote: They goe abord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he eftsoones gan launch his barke forthright.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere long they rowed were quite out of sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fast the land behynd them fled away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But let them pas, whiles wind and wether right</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe serve their turnes: here I a while must stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see a cruell fight doen by the prince this day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For all so soone as Guyon thence was gon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his voyage with his trustie guyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That wicked band of villeins fresh begon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That castle to assaile on every side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lay strong siege about it far and wyde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So huge and infinite their numbers were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the land they under them did hyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So fowle and ugly, that exceeding feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their visages imprest when they approched neare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Them in twelve troupes their Captein did dispart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And round about in fittest steades did place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where each might best offend his proper part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his contrary object most deface,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As every one seem’d meetest in that cace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seven of the same against the Castle gate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In strong entrenchments he did closely place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with incessaunt force and endlesse hate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They battred day and night, and entraunce did awate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The other five five sondry wayes he sett</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the five great Bulwarkes of that pyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto each a Bulwarke did arrett,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T’assayle with open force or hidden guyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hope thereof to win victorious spoile.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They all that charge did fervently apply</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With greedie malice and importune toyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And planted there their huge artillery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With which they dayly made most dreadfull battery.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The first troupe was a monstrous rablement</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of fowle misshapen wightes, of which some were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Headed like Owles, with beckes uncomely bent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Others like Dogs; others like Gryphons dreare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And some had wings, and some had clawes to teare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every one of them had Lynces eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every one did bow and arrowes beare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All those were lawlesse lustes, currupt envyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And covetous aspects, all cruell enimyes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Those same against the bulwarke of the Sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did lay strong siege and battailous assault,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne once did yield it respitt day nor night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But soone as Titan gan his head exault,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soone againe as he his light withhault,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their wicked engins they against it bent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is, each thing by which the eyes may fault:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But two then all more huge and violent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beautie and Money, they that Bulwarke sorely rent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The second Bulwarke was the Hearing sence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst which the second troupe assignment makes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deformed creatures, in straunge difference,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some having heads like Harts, some like to Snakes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some like wilde Bores late rouzd out of the brakes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Slaunderous reproches, and fowle infamies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Leasinges, backbytinges, and vain-glorious crakes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bad counsels, prayses, and false flatteries:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All those against that fort did bend their batteries.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Likewise that same third Fort, that is the Smell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that third troupe was cruelly assayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose hideous shapes were like to feendes of hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some like to houndes, some like to Apes, dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some like to Puttockes, all in plumes arayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All shap’t according their conditions:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For by those ugly formes weren pourtrayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Foolish delights, and fond abusions,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which doe that sence besiege with light illusions.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And that fourth band which cruell battry bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the fourth Bulwarke, that is the Taste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was, as the rest, a grysie rablement;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some mouth’d like greedy Oystriges; some faste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like loathly Toades; some fashioned in the waste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like swine: for so deformd is luxury,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Surfeat, misdiet, and unthriftie waste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vaine feastes, and ydle superfluity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All those this sences Fort assayle incessantly.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But the fift troupe, most horrible of hew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ferce of force, is dreadfull to report;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For some like Snailes, some did like spyders shew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And some like ugly Urchins thick and short:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cruelly they assayed that fift Fort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Armed with dartes of sensuall Delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With stinges of carnall lust, and strong effort</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of feeling pleasures, with which day and night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against that same fift bulwarke they continued fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus these twelve troupes with dreadfull puissaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against that Castle restlesse siege did lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evermore their hideous Ordinaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the Bulwarkes cruelly did play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That now it gan to threaten neare decay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evermore their wicked Capitayn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Provoked them the breaches to assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes with threats, sometimes with hope of gayn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which by the ransack of that peece they should attayn.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>On th’other syde, th’assieged Castles ward</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their stedfast stonds did mightily maintaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many bold repulse and many hard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Achievement wrought, with perill and with payne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That goodly frame from ruine to sustaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And those two brethren Gyauntes did defend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The walles so stoutly with their sturdie mayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That never entraunce any durst pretend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But they to direfull death their groning ghosts did send.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The noble Virgin, Ladie of the Place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was much dismayed with that dreadful sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For never was she in so evill cace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that the Prince, seeing her wofull plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan her recomfort from so sad affright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Offring his service, and his dearest life</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For her defence against that Carle to fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which was their chiefe and th’authour of that strife:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She him remercied as the Patrone of her life.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones himselfe in glitterand armes he dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his well proved weapons to him hent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So, taking courteous congé, he behight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those gates to be unbar’d, and forth he went.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayre mote he thee, the prowest and most gent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ever brandished bright steele on hye!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whome soone as that unruly rablement</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his gay Squyre issewing did espye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They reard a most outrageous dreadfull yelling cry:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And therewithall attonce at him let fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their fluttring arrowes, thicke as flakes of snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And round about him flocke impetuously,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like a great water flood, that tombling low</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fom the high mountaines, threates to overflow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With suddein fury all the fertile playne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the sad husbandmans long hope doth throw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adowne the streame, and all his vowes make vayne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor bounds nor banks his headlong ruine may sustayne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Upon his shield their heaped hayle he bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his sword disperst the raskall flockes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which fled asonder, and him fell before;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As withered leaves drop from their dryed stockes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When the wroth Western wind does reave their locks:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And underneath him his courageous steed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fierce Spumador, trode them downe like docks;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fierce Spumador, borne of heavenly seed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as Laomedon of Phœbus race did breed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which suddeine horrour and confused cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When as their Capteine heard, in haste he yode</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cause to weet, and fault to remedy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a Tygre swift and fierce he rode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That as the winde ran underneath his lode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles his long legs nigh raught unto the ground.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full large he was of limbe, and shoulders brode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But of such subtile substance and unsound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That like a ghost he seem’d whose grave-clothes were unbound:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And in his hand a bended bow was seene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many arrowes under his right side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All deadly daungerous, all cruell keene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Headed with flint, and fethers bloody dide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as the Indians in their quivers hide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those could he well direct and streight as line,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bid them strike the marke which he had eyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne was there salve, ne was there medicine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That mote recure their wounds; so inly they did tine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As pale and wan as ashes was his looke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His body leane and meagre as a rake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And skin all withered like a dryed rooke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereto as cold and drery as a snake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemd to tremble evermore and quake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All in a canvas thin he was bedight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And girded with a belt of twisted brake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his head he wore an Helmet light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made of a dead mans skull, that seemd a ghastly sight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Maleger was his name; and after him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There follow’d fast at hand two wicked Hags,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hoary lockes all loose, and visage grim;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their feet unshod, their bodies wrapt in rags,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both as swift on foot as chased Stags;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet the one her other legge had lame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with a staffe, all full of litle snags,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She did support, and Impotence her name:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But th’other was Impatience, arm’d with raging flame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as the Carle from far the Prince espyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Glistring in armes and warlike ornament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His Beast he felly prickt on either syde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his mischievous bow full readie bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which at him a cruell shaft he sent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he was warie, and it warded well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his shield, that it no further went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to the ground the idle quarrell fell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he another and another did expell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which to prevent the Prince his mortall speare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone to him raught, and fierce at him did ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be avenged of that shot whyleare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he was not so hardy to abide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That bitter stownd, but turning quicke aside</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His light-foot beast, fled fast away for feare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom to poursue the Infant after hide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So fast as his good Courser could him beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But labour lost it was to weene approch him neare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For as the winged wind his Tigre fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That vew of eye could scarse him overtake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne scarse his feet on ground were seene to tred:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through hils and dales he speedy way did make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne hedge ne ditch his readie passage brake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his flight the villein turn’d his face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(As wonts the Tartar by the Caspian lake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whenas the Russian him in fight does chace)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto his Tygres taile, and shot at him apace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Apace he shot, and yet he fled apace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still as the greedy knight nigh to him drew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oftentimes he would relent his pace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That him his foe more fiercely should poursew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when his uncouth manner he did vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan avize to follow him no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But keepe his standing, and his shaftes eschew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill he quite had spent his perlous store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then assayle him fresh, ere he could shift for more.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But that lame Hag, still as abroad he strew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His wicked arrowes, gathered them againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to him brought, fresh batteill to renew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he espying cast her to restraine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From yielding succour to that cursed Swaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her attaching thought her hands to tye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But soone as him dismounted on the plaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That other Hag did far away espye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Binding her sister, she to him ran hastily;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And catching hold of him, as downe he lent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him backeward overthrew, and downe him stayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With their rude handes and gryesly graplement;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that the villein, comming to their ayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon him fell, and lode upon him layd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full litle wanted but he had him slaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of the battell balefull end had made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had not his gentle Squire beheld his paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And commen to his reskew, ere his bitter bane.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So greatest and most glorious thing on ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May often need the helpe of weaker hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So feeble is mans state, and life unsound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in assuraunce it may never stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till it dissolved be from earthly band.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proofe be thou, Prince, the prowest man alyve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And noblest borne of all in Britayne land;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet thee fierce Fortune did so nearely drive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, had not grace thee blest, thou shouldest not survive.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Squyre arriving fiercely in his armes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Snatcht first the one, and then the other Jade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His chiefest letts and authors of his harmes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And them perforce withheld with threatned blade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least that his Lord they should behinde invade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles the Prince, prickt with reprochful shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one awakte out of long slombring shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Revivyng thought of glory and of fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>United all his powres to purge him selfe from blame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like as a fire, the which in hollow cave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath long bene underkept and down supprest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With murmurous disdayne doth inly rave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And grudge in so streight prison to be prest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last breakes forth with furious unrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strives to mount unto his native seat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All that did earst it hinder and molest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yt now devoures with flames and scorching heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And carries into smoake with rage and horror great.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So mightely the Briton Prince him rouzd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of his holde, and broke his caytive bands;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as a Beare, whom angry curres have touzd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having off-shakt them and escapt their hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Becomes more fell, and all that him withstands</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Treads down and overthrowes. Now had the Carle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alighted from his Tigre, and his hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Discharged of his bow and deadly quar’le,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To seize upon his foe flatt lying on the marle.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which now him turnd to disavantage deare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For neither can he fly, nor other harme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But trust unto his strength and manhood meare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith now he is far from his monstrous swarme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of his weapons did himselfe disarme.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The knight, yet wrothfull for his late disgrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fiercely advaunst his valorous right arme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him so sore smott with his yron mace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That groveling to the ground he fell, and fild his place.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Wel weened hee that field was then his owne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all his labor brought to happy end;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When suddein up the villeine overthrowne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of his swowne arose, fresh to contend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gan him selfe to second battaill bend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As hurt he had not beene. Thereby there lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An huge great stone, which stood upon one end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And had not bene removed many a day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some land-marke seemd to bee, or signe of sundry way:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The same he snatcht, and with exceeding sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Threw at his foe, who was right well aware</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To shonne the engin of his meant decay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It booted not to thinke that throw to beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But grownd he gave, and lightly lept areare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eft fierce retourning, as a faulcon fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That once hath failed of her souse full neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Remounts againe into the open ayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And unto better fortune doth her selfe prepayre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So brave retourning, with his brandisht blade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He to the Carle him selfe agayn addrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strooke at him so sternely, that he made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An open passage through his riven brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That halfe the steele behind his backe did rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which drawing backe, he looked evermore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When the hart blood should gush out of his chest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or his dead corse should fall upon the flore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But his dead corse upon the flore fell nathemore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne drop of blood appeared shed to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All were the wownd so wide and wonderous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That through his carcas one might playnly see.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Halfe in amaze with horror hideous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And halfe in rage to be deluded thus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Again through both the sides he strooke him quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That made his spright to grone full piteous;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet nathemore forth fled his groning spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But freshly, as at first, prepard himselfe to fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereat he smitten was with great affright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And trembling terror did his hart apall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne wist he what to thinke of that same sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne what to say, ne what to doe at all:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He doubted least it were some magicall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Illusion that did beguile his sense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or wandring ghost that wanted funerall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or aery spirite under false pretence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or hellish feend raysd up through divelish science.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His wonder far exceeded reasons reach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he began to doubt his dazeled sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oft of error did himselfe appeach:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flesh without blood, a person without spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wounds without hurt, a body without might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That could doe harme, yet could not harmed bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That could not die, yet seemd a mortall wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was most strong in most infirmitee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like did he never heare, like did he never see.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Awhile he stood in this astonishment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet would he not for all his great dismay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Give over to effect his first intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And th’utmost meanes of victory assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or th’utmost yssew of his owne decay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His owne good sword Mordure, that never fayld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At need till now, he lightly threw away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his bright shield that nought him now avayld;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with his naked hands him forcibly assayld.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Twixt his two mighty armes him up he snatcht,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And crusht his carcas so against his brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the disdainfull sowle he thence dispatcht,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And th’ydle breath all utterly exprest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, when he felt him dead, adowne he kest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The lumpish corse unto the sencelesse grownd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adowne he kest it with so puissant wrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That backe againe it did alofte rebownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gave against his mother earth a gronefull sownd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when Joves harnesse-bearing Bird from hye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stoupes at a flying heron with proud disdayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The stone-dead quarrey falls so forciblye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That yt rebownds against the lowly playne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A second fall redoubling backe agayne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then thought the Prince all peril sure was past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that he victor onely did remayne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No sooner thought, then that the Carle as fast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gan heap huge strokes on him, as ere he down was cast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nigh his wits end then woxe th’amazed knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thought his labor lost, and travell vayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against this lifelesse shadow so to fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet life he saw, and felt his mighty mayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, whiles he marveild still, did still him payne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forthy he gan some other wayes advize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How to take life from that dead-living swayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom still he marked freshly to arize</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From th’earth, and from her womb new spirits to reprize.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He then remembred well, that had bene sayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How th’Earth his mother was, and first him bore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She eke, so often as his life decayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did life with usury to him restore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And reysd him up much stronger then before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So soone as he unto her wombe did fall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore to grownd he would him cast no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne him committ to grave terrestriall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But beare him farre from hope of succour usuall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho up he caught him twixt his puissant hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And having scruzd out of his carrion corse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The lothfull life, now loosd from sinfull bands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his shoulders carried him perforse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above three furlongs, taking his full course</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until he came unto a standing lake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him thereinto he threw without remorse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne stird, till hope of life did him forsake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So end of that Carles dayes and his owne paynes did make.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when those wicked Hags from far did spye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like two mad dogs they ran about the lands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And th’one of them with dreadfull yelling crye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throwing away her broken chaines and bands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And having quencht her burning fier-brands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hedlong her selfe did cast into that lake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Impotence with her owne wilfull hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One of Malegers cursed darts did take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So ryv’d her trembling hart, and wicked end did make.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus now alone he conquerour remaines:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, cumming to his Squyre that kept his steed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thought to have mounted; but his feeble vaines</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him faild thereto, and served not his need,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through losse of blood which from his wounds did bleed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he began to faint, and life decay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But his good Squyre, him helping up with speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With stedfast hand upon his horse did stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And led him to the Castle by the beaten way.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Where many Groomes and Squyres ready were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To take him from his steed full tenderly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the fayrest Alma mett him there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With balme, and wine, and costly spicery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To comfort him in his infirmity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftesoones shee causd him up to be convayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of his armes despoyled easily</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In sumptuous bed shee made him to be layd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And al the while his wounds were dressing by him stayd.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-2-12" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Guyon, by Palmers governaunce,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Passing through perils great,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Doth overthrow the Bowre of blisse,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And Acrasie defeat.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now ginnes that goodly frame of Temperaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayrely to rise, and her adorned hed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To pricke of highest prayse forth to advaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Formerly grounded and fast setteled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On firme foundation of true bountyhed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And this brave knight, that for this vertue fightes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now comes to point of that same perilous sted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where Pleasure dwelles in sensuall delights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mongst thousand dangers, and ten thousand Magick mights.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Two dayes now in that sea he sayled has,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever land beheld, ne living wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought save perill still as he did pas:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, when appeared the third Morrow bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the waves to spred her trembling light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An hideous roring far away they heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all their sences filled with affright;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And streight they saw the raging surges reard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up to the skyes, that them of drowning made affeard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Said then the Boteman, “Palmer, stere aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And keepe an even course; for yonder way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We needes must pas (God doe us well acquight!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is the Gulfe of Greedinesse, they say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That deepe engorgeth all this worldes pray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which having swallowd up excessively,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He soone in vomit up againe doth lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And belcheth forth his superfluity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all the seas for feare doe seeme away to fly.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“On thother syde an hideous Rocke is pight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of mightie Magnes stone, whose craggie clift</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Depending from on high, dreadfull to sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over the waves his rugged armes doth lift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And threatneth downe to throw his ragged rift</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On whoso cometh nigh; yet nigh it drawes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All passengers, that none from it can shift:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, whiles they fly that Gulfes devouring jawes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They on this rock are rent, and sunck in helples wawes.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Forward they passe, and strongly he them rowes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill they nigh unto that Gulfe arryve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where streame more violent and greedy growes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then he with all his puisaunce doth stryve</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To strike his oares, and mightily doth drive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hollow vessell through the threatfull wave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, gaping wide to swallow them alyve</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In th’huge abysse of his engulfing grave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth rore at them in vaine, and with great terrour rave.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They, passing by, that grisely mouth did see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sucking the seas into his entralles deepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemd more horrible then hell to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that darke dreadfull hole of Tartare steepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through which the damned ghosts doen often creepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Backe to the world, bad livers to torment:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But nought that falles into this direfull deepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne that approcheth nigh the wyde descent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May backe retourne, but is condemned to be drent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>On thother side they saw that perilous Rocke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Threatning it selfe on them to ruinate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On whose sharp cliftes the ribs of vessels broke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shivered ships, which had beene wrecked late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet stuck with carkases exanimate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of such, as having all their substance spent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In wanton joyes and lustes intemperate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did afterwards make shipwrack violent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both of their life and fame, for ever fowly blent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Forthy this hight The Rocke of vile Reproch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A daungerous and detestable place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which nor fish nor fowle did once approch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yelling Meawes, with Seagulles hoars and bace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Cormoyraunts, with birds of ravenous race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which still sat waiting on that wastfull clift</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For spoile of wretches, whose unhappy cace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After lost credit and consumed thrift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last them driven hath to this despairefull drift.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Palmer, seeing them in safetie past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus saide; “Behold th’ensamples in our sights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of lustfull luxurie and thriftlesse wast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What now is left of miserable wightes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which spent their looser daies in leud delightes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But shame and sad reproch, here to be red</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By these rent reliques, speaking their ill plightes?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let all that live hereby be counselled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To shunne Rocke of Reproch, and it as death to dred!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So forth they rowed; and that Ferryman</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his stiffe oares did brush the sea so strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the hoare waters from his frigot ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the light bubles daunced all along,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles the salt brine out of the billowes sprong.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last fer off they many Islandes spy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On every side floting the floodes emong:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then said the knight; “Lo! I the land descry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore, old Syre, thy course doe thereunto apply.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“That may not bee,” said then the Ferryman,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Least wee unweeting hap to be fordonne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For those same Islands, seeming now and than,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are not firme land, nor any certein wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But stragling plots which to and fro doe ronne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the wide waters: therefore are they hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Wandring Islands. Therefore doe them shonne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For they have ofte drawne many a wandring wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into most deadly daunger and distressed plight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Yet well they seeme to him, that farre doth vew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both faire and fruitfull, and the grownd dispred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With grassy greene of delectable hew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the tall trees with leaves appareled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are deckt with blossoms dyde in white and red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That mote the passengers thereto allure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But whosoever once hath fastened</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His foot thereon, may never it recure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But wandreth evermore uncertein and unsure.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“As th’Isle of Delos whylome, men report,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amid th’Aegæan sea long time did stray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne made for shipping any certeine port,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that Latona traveiling that way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flying from Junoes wrath and hard assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her fayre twins was there delivered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which afterwards did rule the night and day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thenceforth it firmely was established,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for Apolloes temple highly herried.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They to him hearken, as beseemeth meete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And passe on forward: so their way does ly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That one of those same Islands, which doe fleet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the wide sea, they needes must passen by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which seemd so sweet and pleasaunt to the eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it would tempt a man to touchen there:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the banck they sitting did espy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A daintie damsell dressing of her heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By whom a little skippet floting did appeare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She, them espying, loud to them can call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bidding them nigher draw unto the shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she had cause to busie them withall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therewith lowdly laught: But nathemore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would they once turne, but kept on as afore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when she saw, she left her lockes undight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And running to her boat withouten ore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the departing land it launched light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after them did drive with all her power and might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom overtaking, she in merry sort</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them gan to bord, and purpose diversly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now faining dalliaunce and wanton sport,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now throwing forth lewd wordes immodestly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that the Palmer gan full bitterly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her to rebuke for being loose and light:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which not abiding, but more scornfully</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Scoffing at him that did her justly wite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She turnd her bote about, and from them rowed quite.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That was the wanton Phædria, which late</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did ferry him over the Idle lake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom nought regarding they kept on their gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all her vaine allurements did forsake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When them the wary Boteman thus bespake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Here now behoveth us well to avyse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of our safety good heede to take;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For here before a perlous passage lyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where many Mermayds haunt making false melodies:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But by the way there is a great Quicksand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And a whirlepoole of hidden jeopardy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore, Sir Palmer, keepe an even hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For twixt them both the narrow way doth ly.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Scarse had he saide, when hard at hand they spy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That quicksand nigh with water covered;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by the checked wave they did descry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It plaine, and by the sea discoloured:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It called was the quickesand of Unthriftyhed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They, passing by, a goodly Ship did see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Laden from far with precious merchandize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bravely furnished as ship might bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which through great disaventure, or mesprize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her selfe had ronne into that hazardize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose mariners and merchants with much toyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Labour’d in vaine to have recur’d their prize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the rich wares to save from pitteous spoyle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But neither toyle nor traveill might her backe recoyle.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>On th’other side they see that perilous Poole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That called was the Whirlepoole of decay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which full many had with haplesse doole</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beene suncke, of whom no memorie did stay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose circled waters rapt with whirling sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to a restlesse wheele, still ronning round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did covet, as they passed by that way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To draw their bote within the utmost bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his wide Labyrinth, and then to have them dround.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But th’heedful Boteman strongly forth did stretch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His brawnie armes, and all his bodie straine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That th’utmost sandy breach they shortly fetch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles the dredd daunger does behind remaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Suddeine they see from midst of all the Maine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The surging waters like a mountaine rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the great sea, puft up with proud disdaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To swell above the measure of his guise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As threatning to devoure all that his powre despise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The waves come rolling, and the billowes rore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Outragiously, as they enraged were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or wrathfull Neptune did them drive before</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His whirling charet for exceeding feare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For not one puffe of winde there did appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the three thereat woxe much afrayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unweeting what such horrour straunge did reare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones they saw an hideous hoast arrayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of huge Sea monsters, such as living sence dismayd:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Most ugly shapes and horrible aspects,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as Dame Nature selfe mote feare to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or shame that ever should so fowle defects</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From her most cunning hand escaped bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All dreadfull pourtraicts of deformitee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spring-headed Hydres; and sea-shouldring Whales;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great whirlpooles which all fishes make to flee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bright Scolopendraes arm’d with silver scales;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mighty Monoceroses with immeasured tayles.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The dreadful Fish that hath deserv’d the name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Death, and like him lookes in dreadfull hew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The griesly Wasserman, that makes his game</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The flying ships with swiftnes to pursew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The horrible Sea-satyre, that doth shew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His fearefull face in time of greatest storme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Huge Ziffius, whom Mariners eschew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No lesse then rockes, (as travellers informe)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And greedy Rosmarines with visages deforme.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All these, and thousand thousands many more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And more deformed Monsters thousand fold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With dreadfull noise and hollow rombling rore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came rushing, in the fomy waves enrold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which seem’d to fly for feare them to behold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne wonder, if these did the knight appall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all that here on earth we dreadfull hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be but as bugs to fearen babes withall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Compared to the creatures in the seas entrall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Feare nought,” then saide the Palmer well aviz’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“For these same Monsters are not these in deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But are into these fearefull shapes disguiz’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By that same wicked witch, to worke us dreed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And draw from on this journey to proceed.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho lifting up his vertuous staffe on hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He smote the sea, which calmed was with speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all that dreadfull Armie fast gan flye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into great Tethys bosome, where they hidden lye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Quit from that danger forth their course they kept;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as they went they heard a ruefull cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of one that wayld and pittifully wept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That through the sea resounding plaints did fly:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last they in an Island did espy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A seemely Maiden sitting by the shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with great sorrow and sad agony</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seemed some great misfortune to deplore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lowd to them for succour called evermore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which Guyon hearing streight his Palmer bad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To stere the bote towards that dolefull Mayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he might know and ease her sorrow sad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, him avizing better, to him sayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Faire Sir, be not displeasd if disobayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ill it were to hearken to her cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she is inly nothing ill apayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But onely womanish fine forgery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your stubborne hart t’affect with fraile infirmity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“To which when she your courage hath inclind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through foolish pitty, then her guilefull bayt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She will embosome deeper in your mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for your ruine at the last awayt.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Knight was ruled, and the Boteman strayt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Held on his course with stayed stedfastnesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever shroncke, ne ever sought to bayt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His tyred armes for toylesome wearinesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But with his oares did sweepe the watry wildernesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now they nigh approched to the sted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereas those Mermayds dwelt: it was a still</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And calmy bay, on th’one side sheltered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the brode shadow of an hoarie hill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On th’other side an high rocke toured still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That twixt them both a pleasaunt port they made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did like an halfe Theatre fulfill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There those five sisters had continuall trade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And usd to bath themselves in that deceiptfull shade.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They were faire Ladies, till they fondly striv’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With th’Heliconian maides for maystery;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whom they, over-comen, were depriv’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of their proud beautie, and th’one moyity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Transformd to fish for their bold surquedry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But th’upper halfe their hew retayned still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And their sweet skill in wonted melody;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which ever after they abusd to ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>T’allure weake traveillers, whom gotten they did kill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So now to Guyon, as he passed by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their pleasaunt tunes they sweetly thus applyde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“O thou fayre sonne of gentle Faery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That art in mightie armes most magnifyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above all knights that ever batteill tryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O! turne thy rudder hitherward awhile:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here may thy storme-bett vessell safely ryde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This is the Port of rest from troublous toyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The worldes sweet In from paine and wearisome turmoyle.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that the rolling sea, resounding soft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his big base them fitly answered;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on the rocke the waves breaking aloft</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A solemne Meane unto them measured;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles sweet Zephyrus lowd whisteled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His treble, a straunge kinde of harmony,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Guyons senses softly tickeled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he the boteman bad row easily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let him heare some part of their rare melody.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But him the Palmer from that vanity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With temperate advice discounselled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they it past, and shortly gan descry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The land to which their course they leveled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When suddeinly a grosse fog over-spred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his dull vapour all that desert has,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heavens chearefull face enveloped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all things one, and one as nothing was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this great Universe seemd one confused mas.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereat they greatly were dismayd, ne wist</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How to direct theyr way in darkenes wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But feard to wander in that wastefull mist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For tombling into mischiefe unespide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Worse is the daunger hidden then descride.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Suddeinly an innumerable flight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of harmefull fowles about them fluttering cride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with their wicked wings them ofte did smight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sore annoyed, groping in that griesly night.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Even all the nation of unfortunate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fatall birds about them flocked were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as by nature men abhorre and hate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The ill-faste Owle, deaths dreadfull messengere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hoars Night-raven, trump of dolefull drere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The lether-winged Batt, dayes enimy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The ruefull Strich, still waiting on the bere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whistler shrill, that whoso heares doth dy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hellish Harpyes, prophets of sad destiny.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All those, and all that els does horror breed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About them flew, and fild their sayles with feare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet stayd they not, but forward did proceed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles th’one did row, and th’other stifly steare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that at last the weather gan to cleare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the faire land it selfe did playnly sheow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said then the Palmer; “Lo! where does appeare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sacred soile where all our perills grow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therfore, Sir knight, your ready arms about you throw.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He hearkned, and his armes about him tooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles the nimble bote so well her sped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with her crooked keele the land she strooke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then forth the noble Guyon sallied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his sage Palmer that him governed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But th’other by his bote behind did stay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They marched fayrly forth, of nought ydred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both firmely armd for every hard assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With constancy and care, gainst daunger and dismay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ere long they heard an hideous bellowing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of many beasts, that roard outrageously,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if that hungers poynt or Venus sting</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had them enraged with fell surquedry:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet nought they feard, but past on hardily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill they came in vew of those wilde beasts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who all attonce, gaping full greedily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rearing fercely their upstaring crests,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ran towards to devoure those unexpected guests.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But soone as they approcht with deadly threat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Palmer over them his staffe upheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mighty staffe, that could all charmes defeat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftesoones their stubborne corages were queld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And high advaunced crests downe meekely feld;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Instead of fraying, they them selves did feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And trembled as them passing they beheld:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such wondrous powre did in that staffe appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All monsters to subdew to him that did it beare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Of that same wood it fram’d was cunningly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which Caduceus whilome was made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Caduceus, the rod of Mercury,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which he wonts the Stygian realmes invade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through ghastly horror and eternall shade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th’infernall feends with it he can asswage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Orcus tame, whome nothing can persuade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rule the Furyes when they most doe rage.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such vertue in his staffe had eke this Palmer sage.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thence passing forth, they shortly doe arryve</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereas the Bowre of Blisse was situate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A place pickt out by choyce of best alyve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That natures worke by art can imitate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which whatever in this worldly state</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is sweete and pleasing unto living sense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that may dayntest fantasy aggrate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was poured forth with plentifull dispence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made there to abound with lavish affluence.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Goodly it was enclosed rownd about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As well their entred guestes to keep within,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As those unruly beasts to hold without;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was the fence thereof but weake and thin:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nought feard theyr force that fortilage to win,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wisedomes powre, and temperaunces might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which the mightiest things efforced bin:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the gate was wrought of substaunce light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rather for pleasure then for battery or fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yt framed was of precious yvory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemd a worke of admirable witt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therein all the famous history</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Jason and Medæa was ywritt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her mighty charmes, her furious loving fitt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His goodly conquest of the golden fleece,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His raised fayth, and love too lightly flitt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wondred Argo, which in venturous peece</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First through the Euxine seas bore all the flowr of Greece.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ye might have seene the frothy billowes fry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under the ship as thorough them she went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemd the waves were into yvory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or yvory into the waves were sent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And otherwhere the snowy substaunce sprent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With vermell, like the boyes blood therein shed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A piteous spectacle did represent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And otherwhiles, with gold besprinkeled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yt seemd thenchaunted flame which did Crëusa wed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All this and more might in that goodly gate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be red, that ever open stood to all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which thither came; but in the Porch there sate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A comely personage of stature tall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And semblaunce pleasing, more then naturall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That traveilers to him seemd to entize:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His looser garment to the ground did fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And flew about his heeles in wanton wize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not fitt for speedy pace, or manly exercize.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They in that place him Genius did call:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not that celestiall powre, to whom the care</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of life, and generation of all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That lives, perteines in charge particulare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who wondrous things concerning our welfare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And straunge phantomes doth lett us ofte foresee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ofte of secret ill bids us beware:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is our Selfe, whom though we do not see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet each doth in him selfe it well perceive to bee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therefore a God him sage Antiquity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did wisely make, and good Agdistes call;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But this same was to that quite contrary,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The foe of life, that good envyes to all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That secretly doth us procure to fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through guilefull semblants which he makes us see:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He of this Gardin had the governall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Pleasures porter was devizd to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Holding a staffe in hand for mere formalitee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With diverse flowres he daintily was deckt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strowed rownd about; and by his side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A mighty Mazer bowle of wine was sett,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if it had to him bene sacrifide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith all new-come guests he gratyfide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So did he eke Sir Guyon passing by;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he his ydle curtesie defide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And overthrew his bowle disdainfully,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And broke his staffe with which he charmed semblants sly.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus being entred, they behold arownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A large and spacious plaine, on every side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strowed with pleasauns; whose fayre grassy grownd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mantled with greene, and goodly beautifide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all the ornaments of Floraes pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith her mother Art, as halfe in scorne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of niggard Nature, like a pompous bride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did decke her, and too lavishly adorne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When forth from virgin bowre she comes in th’early morne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith the Heavens alwayes joviall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lookte on them lovely, still in stedfast state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne suffred storme nor frost on them to fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their tender buds or leaves to violate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor scorching heat, nor cold intemperate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T’afflict the creatures which therein did dwell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the milde ayre with season moderate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gently attempred, and disposd so well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That still it breathed forth sweet spirit and holesom smell:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>More sweet and holesome then the pleasaunt hill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Rhodope, on which the Nimphe that bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A gyaunt babe herselfe for griefe did kill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or the Thessalian Tempe, where of yore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayre Daphne Phœbus hart with love did gqre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or Ida, where the Gods lov’d to repayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When ever they their heavenly bowres forlore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or sweet Parnasse, the haunt of Muses fayre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or Eden selfe, if ought with Eden mote compayre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Much wondred Guyon at the fayre aspect</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that sweet place, yet suffred no delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sincke into his sence, nor mind affect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But passed forth, and lookt still forward right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Brydling his will and maystering his might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that he came unto another gate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No gate, but like one, being goodly dight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With bowes and braunches, which did broad dilate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their clasping armes in wanton wreathings intricate:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So fashioned a Porch with rare device,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Archt over head with an embracing vine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose bounches hanging downe seemd to entice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All passers by to taste their lushious wine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did them selves into their hands incline,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As freely offering to be gathered;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some deepe empurpled as the Hyacine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some as the Rubine laughing sweetely red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some like faire Emeraudes, not yet well ripened.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And them amongst some were of burnisht gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So made by art to beautify the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which did themselves emongst the leaves enfold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As lurking from the vew of covetous guest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the weake boughes, with so rich load opprest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did bow adowne as overburdened.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under that Porch a comely dame did rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Clad in fayre weedes but fowle disordered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And garments loose that seemd unmeet for womanhed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In her left hand a Cup of gold she held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with her right the riper fruit did reach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose sappy liquor, that with fulnesse sweld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into her cup she scruzd with daintie breach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her fine fingers, without fowle empeach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That so faire winepresse made the wine more sweet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereof she usd to give to drinke to each,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom passing by she happened to meet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was her guise all Straungers goodly so to greet.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So she to Guyon offred it to tast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, taking it out of her tender hond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cup to ground did violently cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all in peeces it was broken fond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with the liquor stained all the lond:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat Excesse exceedingly was wroth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet no’te the same amend, ne yet withstond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But suffered him to passe, all were she loth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, nought regarding her displeasure, forward goth.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There the most daintie Paradise on ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It selfe doth offer to his sober eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which all pleasures plenteously abownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And none does others happinesse envye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The painted flowres, the trees upshooting hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dales for shade, the hilles for breathing space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The trembling groves, the christall running by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, that which all faire workes doth most aggrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The art which all that wrought appeared in no place.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One would have thought, (so cunningly the rude</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And scorned partes were mingled with the fine)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nature had for wantonesse ensude</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Art, and that Art at nature did repine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So striving each th’other to undermine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each did the others worke more beautify;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So differing both in willes agreed in fine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So all agreed, through sweete diversity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Gardin to adorne with all variety.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And in the midst of all a fountaine stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of richest substance that on earth might bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So pure and shiny that the silver flood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through every channell running one might see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most goodly it with curious ymageree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was overwrought, and shapes of naked boyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which some seemd with lively jollitee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To fly about, playing their wanton toyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whylest others did them selves embay in liquid joyes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And over all of purest gold was spred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A trayle of yvie in his native hew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the rich metall was so coloured,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That wight who did not well avis’d it vew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would surely deeme it to bee yvie trew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Low his lascivious armes adown did creepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That themselves dipping in the silver dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their fleecy flowres they fearefully did steepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which drops of Christall seemd for wantones to weep.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Infinit streames continually did well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of this fountaine, sweet and faire to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which into an ample laver fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shortly grew into so great quantitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That like a litle lake it seemd to bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose depth exceeded not three cubits hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That through the waves one might the bottom see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All pav’d beneath with Jaspar shining bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That seemd the fountaine in that sea did sayle upright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And all the margent round about was sett</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With shady Laurell trees, thence to defend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sunny beames which on the billowes bett,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And those which therein bathed mote offend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Guyon hapned by the same to wend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two naked Damzelles he therein espyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which therein bathing seemed to contend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wrestle wantonly, ne car’d to hyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their dainty partes from vew of any which them eyd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sometimes the one would lift the other quight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above the waters, and then downe againe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her plong, as over-maystered by might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where both awhile would covered remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And each the other from to rise restraine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles their snowy limbes, as through a vele,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So through the christall waves appeared plaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then suddeinly both would themselves unhele,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And th’amarous sweet spoiles to greedy eyes revele.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As that faire Starre, the messenger of morne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His deawy face out of the sea doth reare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or as the Cyprian goddesse, newly borne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of th’Ocean’s fruitfull froth, did first appeare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such seemed they, and so their yellow heare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Christalline humor dropped downe apace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom such when Guyon saw, he drew him neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And somewhat gan relent his earnest pace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His stubborne brest gan secret pleasaunce to embrace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The wanton Maidens, him espying, stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gazing awhile at his unwonted guise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then th’one her selfe low ducked in the flood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abasht that her a straunger did avise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But thother rather higher did arise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her two lilly paps aloft displayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all that might his melting hart entyse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To her delights she unto him bewrayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rest hidd underneath him more desirous made.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that the other likewise up arose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her faire lockes, which formerly were bown’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Up in one knott, she low adowne did lose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which flowing low and thick her cloth’d arownd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And th’yvorie in golden mantle gownd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that faire spectacle from him was reft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet that which reft it no lesse faire was fownd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So hidd in lockes and waves from lookers theft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nought but her lovely face she for his looking left.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Withall she laughed, and she blusht withall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That blushing to her laughter gave more grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And laughter to her blushing, as did fall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now when they spyde the knight to slacke his pace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them to behold, and in his sparkling face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The secrete signes of kindled lust appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their wanton meriments they did encreace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to him beckned to approch more neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shewd him many sights that corage cold could reare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>On which when gazing him the Palmer saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He much rebukt those wandring eyes of his,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And counseld well him forward thence did draw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now are they come nigh to the Bowre of blis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her fond favorites so nam’d amis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When thus the Palmer: “Now, Sir, well avise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For here the end of all our traveill is:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here wonnes Acrasia, whom we must surprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Els she will slip away, and all our drift despise.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones they heard a most melodious sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all that mote delight a daintie eare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as attonce might not on living ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save in this Paradise, be heard elsewhere:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right hard it was for wight which did it heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To read what manner musicke that mote bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all that pleasing is to living eare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was there consorted in one harmonee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Birdes, voices, instruments, windes, waters, all agree</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The joyous birdes, shrouded in chearefull shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their notes unto the voice attempred sweet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th’Angelicall soft trembling voyces made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To th’instruments divine respondence meet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The silver sounding instruments did meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the base murmure of the waters fall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The waters fall with difference discreet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now soft, now loud, unto the wind did call;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gentle warbling wind low answered to all.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There, whence that Musick seemed heard to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was the faire Witch her selfe now solacing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a new Lover, whom, through sorceree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And witchcraft, she from farre did thither bring:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There she had him now laid aslombering</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In secret shade after long wanton joyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilst round about them pleasauntly did sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Many faire Ladies and lascivious boyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ever mixt their song with light licentious toyes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And all that while right over him she hong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With her false eyes fast fixed in his sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As seeking medicine whence she was stong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or greedily depasturing delight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oft inclining downe, with kisses light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For feare of waking him, his lips bedewd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through his humid eyes did sucke his spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quite molten into lust and pleasure lewd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherewith she sighed soft, as if his case she rewd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The whiles some one did chaunt this lovely lay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah! see, whoso fayre thing doest faine to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In springing flowre the image of thy day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah! see the Virgin Rose, how sweetly shee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth first peepe foorth with bashfull modestee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That fairer seemes the lesse ye see her may.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lo! see soone after how more bold and free</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her bared bosome she doth broad display;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo! see soone after how she fades and falls away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So passeth, in the passing of a day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of mortall life the leafe, the bud, the flowre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne more doth florish after first decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That earst was sought to deck both bed and bowre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of many a lady’, and many a Paramowre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gather therefore the Rose whilest yet is prime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For soone comes age that will her pride deflowre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gather the Rose of love whilest yet is time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whilest loving thou mayst loved be with equall crime.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He ceast; and then gan all the quire of birdes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their diverse notes t’attune unto his lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As in approvaunce of his pleasing wordes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The constant payre heard all that he did say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet swarved not, but kept their forward way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through many covert groves and thickets close,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which they creeping did at last display</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That wanton Lady with her lover lose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose sleepie head she in her lap did soft dispose.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Upon a bed of Roses she was layd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As faint through heat, or dight to pleasant sin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And was arayd, or rather disarayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All in a vele of silke and silver thin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hid no whit her alablaster skin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But rather shewd more white, if more might bee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More subtile web Arachne cannot spin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor the fine nets, which oft we woven see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of scorched deaw, do not in th’ayre more lightly flee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her snowy brest was bare to ready spoyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of hungry eies, which n’ote therewith be fild;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet, through languour of her late sweet toyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Few drops, more cleare then Nectar, forth distild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That like pure Orient perles adowne it trild;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her faire eyes, sweet smyling in delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Moystened their fierie beames, with which she thrild</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fraile harts, yet quenched not; like starry light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, sparckling on the silent waves, does seeme more bright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The young man, sleeping by her, seemd to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some goodly swayne of honorable place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That certes it great pitty was to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him his nobility so fowle deface:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A sweet regard and amiable grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mixed with manly sternesse, did appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet sleeping, in his well proportiond face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on his tender lips the downy heare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did now but freshly spring, and silken blossoms beare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His warlike Armes, the ydle instruments</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of sleeping praise, were hong upon a tree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his crave shield, full of old moniments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was fowly ras’t, that none the signes might see:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne for them ne for honour cared hee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought that did to his advauncement tend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in lewd loves, and wastfull luxuree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His dayes, his goods, his bodie, he did spend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O horrible enchantment, that him so did blend!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The noble Elfe and carefull Palmer drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So nigh them, minding nought but lustfull game</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That suddein forth they on them rusht, and threw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A subtile net, which only for that same</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The skilfull Palmer formally did frame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So held them under fast; the whiles the rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fled all away for feare of fowler shame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The faire Enchauntresse, so unwares opprest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tryde all her arts and all her sleights thence out to wrest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And eke her lover strove, but all in vaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that same net so cunningly was wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That neither guile nor force might it distraine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They tooke them both, and both them strongly bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In captive bandes, which there they readie found:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But her in chaines of adamant he tyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For nothing else might keepe her safe and sound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Verdant (so he hight) he soone untyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And counsell sage in steed thereof to him applyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But all those pleasaunt bowres, and Pallace brave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Guyon broke downe with rigour pittilesse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought their goodly workmanship might save</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them from the tempest of his wrathfulnesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that their blisse he turn’d to balefulnesse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their groves he feld; their gardins did deface;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their arbers spoyle; their Cabinets suppresse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their banket houses burne; their buildings race;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, of the fayrest late, now made the fowlest place.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then led they her away, and eke that knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They with them led, both sorrowfull and sad.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The way they came, the same retourn’d they right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till they arrived where they lately had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Charm’d those wild-beasts that rag’d with furie mad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, now awaking, fierce at them gan fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As in their mistresse reskew whom they lad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But them the Palmer soone did pacify.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Guyon askt, what meant those beastes which there did ly?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sayd he; “These seeming beasts are men indeed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom this Enchauntresse hath transformed thus;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whylome her lovers, which her lustes did feed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now turned into figures hideous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">According to their mindes like monstruous.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Sad end,” (quoth he) “of life intemperate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mourneful meed of joyes delicious!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, Palmer, if it mote thee so aggrate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let them returned be unto their former state.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Streight way he with his vertuous staffe them strooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And streight of beastes they comely men became;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet being men they did unmanly looke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stared ghastly; some for inward shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And some for wrath to see their captive Dame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But one above the rest in speciall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That had an hog beene late, hight Grylle by name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Repyned greatly, and did him miscall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That had from hoggish forme him brought to naturall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Saide Guyon; “See the mind of beastly man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hath so soone forgot the excellence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his creation, when he life began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That now he chooseth with vile difference</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be a beast, and lacke intelligence!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom the Palmer thus: “The donghill kinde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Delightes in filth and fowle incontinence:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let Gryll be Gryll, and have his hoggish minde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But let us hence depart whilest wether serves and winde.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
