<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-4" epub:type="part z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Containing the Legend of Cambel and Triamond, or of Friendship</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="book-4-prologue" epub:type="prologue">
				<p>
					<span>The rugged forhead, that with grave foresight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Welds kingdomes causes and affaires of state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My looser rimes (I wote) doth sharply wite</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For praising love as I have done of late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And magnifying lovers deare debate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which fraile youth is oft to follie led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through false allurement of that pleasing baite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That better were in vertues discipled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then with vaine poemes weeds to have their fancies fed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such ones ill judge of love that cannot love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne in their frosen hearts feele kindly flame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forthy they ought not thing unknowne reprove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne naturall affection faultlesse blame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For fault of few that have abusd the same;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For it of honor and all vertue is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The roote, and brings forth glorious flowres of fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That crowne true lovers with immortall blis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The meed of them that love, and do not live amisse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which who so list looke backe to former ages,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And call to count the things that then were donne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall find that all the workes of those wise sages,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And brave exploits which great Heroes wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In love were either ended or begunne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Witnesse the father of Philosophic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to his Critias, shaded oft from sunne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of love full manie lessons did apply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which these Stoicke censours cannot well deny.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To such therefore I do not sing at all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to that sacred Saint my soveraigne Queene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In whose chast brest all bountie naturall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And treasures of true love enlocked beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bove all her sexe that ever yet was scene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To her I sing of love, that loveth best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And best is lov’d of all alive, I weene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To her this song most fitly is addrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Queene of love, and Prince of peace from heaven blest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which that she may the better deigne to heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do thou, dred infant, Venus dearling dove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From her high spirit chase imperious feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And use of awfull Majestic remove:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Insted thereof with drops of melting love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deawd with ambrosiall kisses, by thee gotten</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From thy sweete smyling mother from above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sprinckle her heart, and haughtie courage soften,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she may hearke to love, and reade this lesson often.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Fayre Britomart saves Amoret:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Duessa discord breedes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Twixt Scudamour and Blandamour:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Their fight and warlike deedes.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Of lovers sad calamities of old</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full many piteous stories doe remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But none more piteous ever was ytold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then that of Amorets hart-binding chaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And this of Florimels unworthie paine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The deare compassion of whose bitter fit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My softened heart so sorely doth constraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I with teares full oft doe pittie it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And oftentimes doe wish it never had bene writ.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For from the time that Scudamour her bought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In perilous fight she never joyed day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A perilous fight, when he with force her brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From twentie Knights that did him all assay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet fairely well he did them all dismay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with great glorie both the shield of love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the Ladie selfe he brought away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom having wedded, as did him behove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A new unknowen mischiefe did from him remove.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For that same vile Enchauntour Busyran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The very selfe same day that she was wedded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amidst the bridale feast, whilest every man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Surcharged with wine, were heedlesse and ill-hedded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All bent to mirth before the bride was bedded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Brought in that mask of love which late was showen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there the Ladie, ill of friends bestedded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By way of sport, as oft in maskes is knowen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conveyed quite away to living wight unknowen.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Seven moneths he so her kept in bitter smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because his sinfull lust she would not serve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill such time as noble Britomart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Released her, that else was like to sterve</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through cruell knife that her deare heart did kerve:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now she is with her upon the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Marching in lovely wise, that could deserve</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No spot of blame, though spite did oft assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To blot her with dishonor of so faire a pray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet should it be a pleasant tale, to tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The diverse usage, and demeanure daint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That each to other made, as oft befell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Amoret right fearefull was and faint</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lest she wtih blame her honor should attaint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That everie word did tremble as she spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And everie looke was coy and wondrous quaint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And everie limbe that touched her did quake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet could she not but curteous countenance to her make.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For well she wist, as true it was indeed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her lives Lord and patrone of her health</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right well deserved, as his duefull meed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her love, her service, and her utmost wealth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All is his justly that all freely dealth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nathlesse her honor, dearer then her life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She sought to save, as thing reserv’d from stealth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Die had she lever with Enchanters knife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then to be false in love, profest a virgine wife.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereto her feare was made so much the greater</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through fine abusion of that Briton mayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, for to hide her fained sex the better</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And maske her wounded mind, both did and sayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full many things so doubtfull to be wayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That well she wist not what by them to gesse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For other-whiles to her she purpos made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of love, and other-whiles of lustfulnesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That much she feard his mind would grow to some excesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His will she feard; for him she surely thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be a man, such as indeed he seemed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And much the more by that he lately wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When her from deadly thraldome he redeemed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which no service she too much esteemed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet dread of shame and doubt of fowle dishonor</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made her not yeeld so much as due she deemed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet Britomart attended duly on her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As well became a knight, and did to her all honor.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It so befell one evening, that they came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto a Castell, lodged there to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where many a knight, and many a lovely Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was then assembled deeds of armes to see:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst all which was none more faire then shee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That many of them mov’d to eye her sore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The custome of that place was such, that hee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which had no love nor lemman there in store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should either winne him one, or lye without the dore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Amongst the rest there was a jolly knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, being asked for his love, avow’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That fairest Amoret was his by right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And offred that to justifie alowd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The warlike virgine, seeing his so prowd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And boastfull chalenge, wexed inlie wroth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But for the present did her anger shrowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sayd, her love to lose she was full loth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But either he should neither of them have, or both.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So foorth they went, and both together giusted;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that same younker soone was overthrowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made repent that he had rashly lusted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thing unlawfull, that was not his owne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet since he seemed valiant, though unknowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She, that no lesse was courteous then stout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cast how to salve, that both the custome showne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were kept, and yet that Knight not locked out;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That seem’d full hard t’accord two things so far in dout.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Seneschall was cal’d to deeme the right:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom she requir’d, that first fayre Amoret</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might be to her allow’d, as to a Knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That did her win and free from chalenge set:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which straight to her was yeelded without let.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, since that strange Knights love from him was quitted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She claim’d that to her selfe, as Ladies det,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He as a Knight might justly be admitted;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So none should be out shut, sith all of loves were fitted.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that, her glistring helmet she unlaced;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which doft, her golden lockes, that were upbound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still in a knot, unto her heeles downe traced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And like a silken veile in compasse round</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About her backe and all her bodie wound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as the shining skie in summers night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What time the dayes with scorching heat abound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is creasted all with lines of firie light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it prodigious seemes in common peoples sight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such when those Knights and Ladies all about</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beheld her, all were with amazement smit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every one gan grow in secret dout</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of this and that, according to each wit:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some thought that some enchantment faygned it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some, that Bellona in that warlike wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To them appear’d, with shield and armour fit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some, that it was a maske of strange disguise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So diversely each one did sundrie doubts devise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But that young Knight, which through her gentle deed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was to that goodly fellowship restor’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ten thousand thankes did yeeld her for her meed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, doubly overcommen, her ador’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So did they all their former strife accord;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke fayre Amoret, now freed from feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More franke affection did to her afford,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to her bed, which she was wont forbeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now freely drew, and found right safe assurance theare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Where all that night they of their loves did treat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hard adventures, twixt themselves alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That each the other gan with passion great</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And griefull pittie privately bemone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The morow next, so soone as Titan shone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They both uprose and to their waies them dight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long wandred they, yet never met with none</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to their willes could them direct aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or to them tydings tell that mote their harts delight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lo! thus they rode, till at the last they spide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two armed Knights that toward them did pace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ech of them had ryding by his side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Ladie, seeming in so farre a space:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Ladies none they were, albee in face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And outward shew faire semblance they did beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For under maske of beautie and good grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vile treason and fowle falshood hidden were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That mote to none but to the warie wise appeare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The one of them the false Duessa night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That now had chang’d her former wonted hew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she could d’on so manie shapes in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As ever could Cameleon colours new;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So could she forge all colours, save the trew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other no whit better was then shee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that such as she was she plaine did shew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet otherwise much worse, if worse might bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dayly more offensive unto each degree.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her name was Ate, mother of debate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all dissention which doth dayly grow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst fraile men, that many a publike state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many a private oft doth overthrow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her false Duessa, who full well did know</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be most fit to trouble noble knights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which hunt for honor, raised from below</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the dwellings of the damned sprights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where she in darknes wastes her cursed daies and nights.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hard by the gates of hell her dwelling is;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There, whereas all the plagues and harmes abound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which punish wicked men that walke amisse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It is a darksome delve farre under ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With thornes and barren brakes environd round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none the same may easily out-win:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet many waies to enter may be found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But none to issue forth when one is in;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For discord harder is to end then to begin.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And all within, the riven walls were hung</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With ragged monuments of times forepast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which the sad effects of discord sung:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There were rent robes and broken scepters plast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Altars defyld, and holy things defast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disshivered speares, and shields ytorne in twaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great cities ransackt, and strong castles rast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nations captived, and huge armies slaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all which ruines there some relicks did remaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There was the signe of antique Babylon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of fatall Thebes; of Rome that raigned long;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of sacred Salem; and sad Ilion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For memorie of which on high there hong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The golden Apple, cause of all their wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which the three faire Goddesses did strive:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There also was the name of Nimrod strong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Alexander, and his Princes five</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which shar’d to them the spoiles that he had got alive.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And there the relicks of the drunken fray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which amongst the Lapithees befell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of the bloodie feast, which sent away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So many Centaures drunken soules to hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That under great Alcides furie fell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of the dreadfull discord, which did drive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The noble Argonauts to outrage fell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That each of life sought others to deprive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All mindlesse of the Golden fleece, which made them strive.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And eke of private persons many moe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That were too long a worke to count them all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some, of sworne friends that did their faith forgoe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some, of borne brethren prov’d unnaturall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some, of deare lovers foes perpetuall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Witnesse their broken bandes there to be scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their girlonds rent, their bowres despoyled all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The moniments whereof there byding beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As plaine as at the first when they were fresh and greene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such was her house within; but all without,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The barren ground was full of wicked weedes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which she her selfe had sowen all about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now growen great, at first of little seedes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The seedes of evill wordes and factious deedes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, when to ripenesse due they growen arre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bring foorth an infinite increase, that breedes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tumultuous trouble, and contentious Jarre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which most often end in bloudshed and in warre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And those same cursed seedes doe also serve</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To her for bread, and yeeld her living food:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For life it is to her, when others sterve</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through mischievous debate and deadly feood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she may sucke their life, and drinke their blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which she from her childhood had bene fed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she at first was borne of hellish brood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by infernall furies nourished;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That by her monstrous shape might easily be red.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her face most fowle and filthy was to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With squinted eyes contrarie wayes intended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And loathly mouth, unmeete a mouth to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nought but gall and venim comprehended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wicked wordes that God and man offended.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her lying tongue was in two parts divided,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both the parts did speake, and both contended;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as her tongue so was her hart discided,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That never thoght one thing, but doubly stil was guided.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Als as she double spake, so heard she double,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With matchlesse eares deformed and distort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fild with false rumors and seditious trouble,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bred in assemblies of the vulgar sort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That still are led with every light report:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as her eares, so eke her feet were odde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And much unlike; th’one long, the other short,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both misplast; that, when th’one forward yode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The other backe retired and contrarie trode.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Likewise unequall were her handes twaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That one did reach the other pusht away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That one did make the other mard againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sought to bring all things unto decay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereby great riches, gathered manie a day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She in short space did often bring to nought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And their possessours often did dismay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all her studie was and all her thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How she might overthrow the things that Concord wrought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So much her malice did her might surpas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That even th’Almightie selfe she did maligne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because to man so mercifull he was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto all his creatures so benigne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith she her selfe was of his grace indigne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all this worlds faire workmanship she tride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto his last confusion to bring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that great golden chaine quite to divide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With which it blessed Concord hath together tide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such was that hag which with Duessa roade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, serving her in her malitious use</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hurt good knights, was, as it were, her baude</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sell her borrowed beautie to abuse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For though, like withered tree that wanteth juyce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She old and crooked were, yet now of late</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As fresh and fragrant as the floure-deluce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She was become, by chaunge of her estate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made full goodly joyance to her new-found mate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her mate, he was a jollie youthfull knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That bore great sway in armes and chivalrie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And was indeed a man of mickle might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His name was Blandamour, that did descrie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His fickle mind full of inconstancie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now himselfe he fitted had right well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With two companions of like qualitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faithlesse Duessa, and false Paridell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That whether were more false full hard it is to tell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now when this gallant with his goodly crew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From farre espide the famous Britomart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like knight adventurous in outward vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his faire paragon, his conquests part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Approching nigh, eftsoones his wanton hart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was tickled with delight, and jesting sayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Lo! there, Sir Paridel, for your desart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Good lucke presents you with yond lovely mayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For pitie that ye want a fellow for your ayd.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By that the lovely paire drew nigh to hond:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when as Paridel more plaine beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Albee in heart he like affection fond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet mindfull how he late by one was feld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That did those armes and that same scutchion weld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He had small lust to buy his love so deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But answered; “Sir, him wise I never held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, having once escaped perill neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would afterwards afresh the sleeping evill reare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“This knight too late his manhood and his might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I did assay, that me right dearely cost;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne list I for revenge provoke new fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne for light Ladies love that soone is lost.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hot-spurre youth so scorning to be crost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Take then to you this Dame of mine,” (quoth hee)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“And I, without your perill or your cost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will chalenge yond same other for my fee.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So forth he fiercely prickt that one him scarce could see.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The warlike Britonesse her soone addrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with such uncouth welcome did receave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her fayned Paramour, her forced guest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That being forst his saddle soone to leave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him selfe he did of his new love deceave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made him selfe thensample of his follie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which done, she passed forth, not taking leave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And left him now as sad, as whilome jollie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well warned to beware with whom he dar’d to dallie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when his other companie beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They to his succour ran with readie ayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, finding him unable once to weld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They reared him on horsebacke and upstayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till on his way they had him forth convayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the way, with wondrous griefe of mynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shame, he shewd him selfe to be dismayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More for the love which he had left behynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then that which he had to Sir Paridel resynd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nathlesse he forth did march, well as he might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made good semblance to his companie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dissembling his disease and evill plight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that ere long they chaunced to espie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two other knights, that towards them did ply</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With speedie course, as bent to charge them new</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when as Blandamour approching nie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perceiv’d to be such as they seemd in vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was full wo, and gan his former griefe renew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For th’one of them he perfectly descride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be Sir Scudamour, by that he bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The God of love with wings displayed wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom mortally he hated evermore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both for his worth, that all men did adore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke because his love he wonne by right:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when he thought, it grieved him full sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, through the bruses of his former fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He now unable was to wreake his old despight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Forthy he thus to Paridel bespake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Faire Sir, of friendship let me now you pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That as I late adventured for your sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hurts whereof me now from battell stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye will me now with like good turne repay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And justifie my cause on yonder knight.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Ah! Sir,” (said Paridell) “do not dismay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your selfe for this; my selfe will for you fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As ye have done for me: the left hand rubs the right.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that he put his spurres unto his steed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With speare in rest, and toward him did fare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like shaft out of a bow preventing speed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Scudamour was shortly well aware</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his approch, and gan him selfe prepare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him to receive with entertainment meete.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So furiously they met, that either bare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other downe under their horses feete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That what of them became themselves did scarsly weete,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when two billowes in the Irish sowndes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forcibly driven with contrarie tydes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do meete together, each abacke rebowndes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With roaring rage; and dashing on all sides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That filleth all the sea with fome, divydes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The doubtfull current into divers wayes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So fell those two in spight of both their prydes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Scudamour himselfe did soone uprayse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, mounting light, his foe for lying long upbrayes:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who, rolled on an heape, lay still in swound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All carelesse of his taunt and bitter rayle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that the rest him seeing lie on ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ran hastily, to weete what did him ayle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where rinding that the breath gan him to fayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With busie care they strove him to awake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doft his helmet, and undid his mayle:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So much they did, that at the last they brake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His slomber, yet so mazed that he nothing spake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when as Blandamour beheld, he sayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“False faitour Scudamour, that hast by slight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And foule advantage this good Knight dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Knight much better then thy selfe behight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well falles it thee that I am not in plight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This day to wreake the dammage by thee donne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such is thy wont, that still when any Knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is weakned, then thou doest him overronne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So hast thou to thy selfe false honour often wonne.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He little answer’d, but in manly heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mightie indignation did forbeare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which was not yet so secret, but some part</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereof did in his frouning face appeare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as a gloomie cloud, the which doth beare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An hideous storme, is by the Northerne blast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quite overblowne, yet doth not passe so cleare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that it all the skie doth overcast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With darknes dred, and threatens all the world to wast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ah gentle knight!” then false Duessa sayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Why do ye strive for Ladies love so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose chiefe desire is love and friendly aid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst gentle Knights to nourish evermore?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne be ye wroth, Sir Scudamour, therefore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she, your love, list love another knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne do your selfe dislike a whit the more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Love is free, and led with selfe delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne will enforced be with maisterdome or might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So false Duessa; but vile Ate thus:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Both foolish knights! I can but laugh at both,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That strive and storme with stirre outrageous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For her, that each of you alike doth loth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And loves another, with whom now she goth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In lovely wise, and sleepes, and sports, and playes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilest both you here with many a cursed oth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sweare she is yours, and stirre up bloudie frayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To win a willow bough, whilest other weares the baycs.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Vile hag!” (sayd Scudamour) “why dost thou lye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And falsly seekst a vertuous wight to shame?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Fond knight,” (sayd she) “the thing that with this eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I saw, why should I doubt to tell the same?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Then tell,” (quoth Blandamour) “and feare no blame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tell what thou saw’st, maulgre who so it heares.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“I saw” (quoth she) “a stranger knight, whose name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I wote not well, but in his shield he beares</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(That well I wote) the heads of many broken speares;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“I saw him have your Amoret at will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I saw him kisse; I saw him her embrace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I saw him sleepe with her all night his fill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All manie nights; and manie by in place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That present were to testifie the case.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when as Scudamour did heare, his heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was thrild with inward griefe: as when in chace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Parthian strikes a stag with shivering dart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The beast astonisht stands in middest of his smart.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So stood Sir Scudamour when this he heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne word had he to speake for great dismay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But lookt on Glauce grim; who woxe afeard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of outrage for the words which she heard say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Albee untrue she wist them by assay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Blandamour, whenas he did espie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His chaunge of cheere that anguish did bewray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He woxe full blithe, as he had got thereby,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gan thereat to triumph without victorie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Lo! recreant,” (sayd he) “the fruitlesse end</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of thy vaine boast, and spoile of love misgotten,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereby the name of knight-hood thou dost shend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all true lovers with dishonor blotten:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All things not rooted well will soone be rotten.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Fy, fy! false knight,” (then false Duessa cryde)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Unworthy life, that love with guile hast gotten;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be thou, where ever thou do go or ryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loathed of ladies all, and of all knights defyde!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Scudamour, for passing great despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Staid not to answer; scarcely did refraine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that in all those knights and ladies sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He for revenge had guiltlesse Glauce slaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, being past, he thus began amaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“False traitour squire! false squire of falsest knight!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why doth mine hand from thine avenge abstaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose Lord hath done my love this foule despight?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why do I not it wreake on thee, now in my might?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Discourteous, disloyall Britomart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untrue to God, and unto man unjust!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What vengeance due can equall thy desart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hast with shamefull spot of sinfull lust</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Defil’d the pledge committed to thy trust?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let ugly shame and endlesse infamy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Colour thy name with foule reproaches rust!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet thou, false Squire, his fault shalt deare aby,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with thy punishment his penance shalt supply.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The aged Dame, him seeing so enraged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was dead with feare; nathlesse, as neede required,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His flaming furie sought to have assuaged</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sober words, that sufferance desired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till time the tryall of her truth expyred;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evermore sought Britomart to cleare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he the more with furious rage was fyred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thrise his hand to kill her did upreare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thrise he drew it backe; so did at last forbeare.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Blandamour winnes false Florimell;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Paridell for her strives;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They are accorded: Agape</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Doth lengthen her Sonnes lives.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Firebrand of hell, first tynd in Phlegeton</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By thousand furies, and from thence out throwen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into this world to worke confusion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And set it all on fire by force unknowen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is wicked discord; whose small sparkes once blowen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">None but a God or godlike man can slake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as was Orpheus, that, when strife was growen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst those famous ympes of Greece, did take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His silver Harpe in hand and shortly friends them make:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Or such as that celestiall Psalmist was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, when the wicked feend his Lord tormented,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With heavenly notes, that did all other pas</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The outrage of his furious fit relented.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such Musicke is wise words, with time concented,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To moderate stiffe mindes disposd to strive:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as that prudent Romane well invented,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What time his people into partes did rive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Them reconcyld againe, and to their homes did drive.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such us’d wise Glauce to that wrathfull knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To calme the tempest of his troubled thought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet Blandamour with termes of foule despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Paridell her scornd, and set at nought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As old and crooked and not good for ought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both they unwise, and warelesse of the evill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That by themselves unto themselves is wrought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through that false witch, and that foule aged drevill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The one a feend, the other an incarnate devill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With whom as they thus rode accompanide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They were encountred of a lustie Knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That had a goodly Ladie by his side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom he made great dalliance and delight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It was to weete the bold Sir Ferraugh hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He that from Braggadocchio whilome reft</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The snowy Florimell, whose beautie bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made him seeme happie for so glorious theft;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet was it in due triall but a wandring weft.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when as Blandamour, whose fancie light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was alwaies flitting as the wavering wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After each beautie that appeard in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beheld, eftsoones it prickt his wanton mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sting of lust that reasons eye did blind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to Sir Paridell these words he sent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Sir knight, why ride ye dumpish thus behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since so good fortune doth to you present</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So fayre a spoyle, to make you joyous meriment?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Paridell, that had too late a tryall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the bad issue of his counsell vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">List not to hearke, but made this faire denyall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Last turne was mine, well proved to my paine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This now be yours; God send you better gaine!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose scoffed words he taking halfe in scorne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fiercely forth prickt his steed as in disdaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against that Knight, ere he him well could torne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By meanes whereof he hath him lightly overborne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who, with the sudden stroke astonisht sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the ground awhile in slomber lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles his love away the other bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, shewing her, did Paridell upbray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Lo! sluggish Knight, the victors happie pray!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So fortune friends the bold:” whom Paridell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeing so faire indeede, as he did say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His hart with secret envie gan to swell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And inly grudge at him that he had sped so well.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nathlesse proud man himselfe the other deemed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having so peerelesse paragon ygot:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For sure the fayrest Florimell him seemed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To him was fallen for his happie lot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose like alive on earth he weened not:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore he her did court, did serve, did wooe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With humblest suit that he imagine mot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all things did devise, and all things dooe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That might her love prepare, and liking win theretoo.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She, in regard thereof, him recompenst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With golden words and goodly countenance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And such fond favours sparingly dispenst:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes him blessing with a light eye-glance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And coy lookes tempring with loose dalliance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes estranging him in sterner wise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That having cast him in a foolish trance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He seemed brought to bed in Paradise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And prov’d himselfe most foole in what he seem’d most wise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So great a mistresse of her art she was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And perfectly practiz’d in womans craft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That though therein himselfe he thought to pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by his false allurements wylie draft</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had thousand women of their love beraft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet now he was surpriz’d: for that false spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which that same witch had in this forme engraft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was so expert in every subtile slight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it could overreach the wisest earthly wight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet he to her did dayly service more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dayly more deceived was thereby;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet Paridell him envied therefore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As seeming plast in sole felicity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So blind is lust false colours to descry.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Ate soone discovering his desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rinding now fit opportunity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To stirre up strife twixt love and spight and ire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did privily put coles unto his secret fire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By sundry meanes thereto she prickt him forth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now with remembrance of those spightfull speaches,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">JNow with opinion or his owne more worth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now with recounting of like former breaches</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made in their friendship, as that Hag him teaches:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever when his passion is allayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She it revives, and new occasion reaches;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That on a time, as they together way’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He made him open chalenge, and thus boldly sayd;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Too boastfull Blandamoure! too long I beare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The open wrongs thou doest me day by day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well know’st thou, when we friendship first did sweare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The covenant was, that every spoyle or pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should equally be shard betwixt us tway.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where is my part then of this Ladie bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom to thy selfe thou takest quite away?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Render therefore therein to me my right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or answere for thy wrong as shall fall out in fight.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Exceeding wroth thereat was Blandamour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gan this bitter answere to him make:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Too foolish Paridell! that fayrest floure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wouldst gather faine, and yet no paines wouldst take:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But not so easie will I her forsake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This hand her wonne, this hand shall her defend.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that they gan their shivering speares to shake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And deadly points at cithers breast to bend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgetfull each to have bene ever others frend.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Their firie steedes with so untamed forse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did beare them both to fell avenges end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That both their speares with pitilesse remorse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through shield and mayle and haberjeon did wend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in their flesh a griesly passage rend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with the furie of their owne affret</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each other horse and man to ground did send;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where, lying still awhile, both did forget</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The perilous present stownd in which their lives were set.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when two warlike Brigandines at sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With murdrous weapons arm’d to cruell fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do meete together on the watry lea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They stemme ech other with so fell despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with the shocke of their owne heedlesse might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their wooden ribs are shaken nigh asonder.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They which from shore behold the dreadfull sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of flashing fire, and heare the ordenance thonder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do greatly stand amaz’d at such unwonted wonder.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At length they both upstarted in amaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As men awaked rashly out of dreme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And round about themselves awhile did gaze;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till seeing her, that Florimell did seme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In doubt to whom she viclorie should deeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith their dulled sprights they edgd anew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, drawing both their swords, with rage extreme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like two mad mastiffes, each on other flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shields did share, and mailes did rash, and helmes did hew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So furiously each other did assayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if their soules they would attonce have rent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of their brests, that streames of bloud did rayle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adowne, as if their springs of life were spent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the ground with purple bloud was sprent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all their armours staynd with bloudie gore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet scarcely once to breath would they relent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So mortall was their malice, and so sore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Become, of fayned friendship which they vow’d afore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And that which is for Ladies most besitting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To stint all strife and foster friendly peace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was from those Dames so farre and so unfitting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As that, instead of praying them surcease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They did much more their cruelty encrease;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bidding them fight for honour of their love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rather die then Ladies cause release:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which vaine termes so much they did them move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That both resolv’d the last extremities to prove.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There they, I weene, would fight untill this day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had not a Squire, even he the Squire of Dames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By great adventure travelled that way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who seeing both bent to so bloudy games,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both of old well knowing by their names,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drew nigh, to weete the cause of their debate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And first laide on those Ladies thousand blames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That did not seeke t’ appease their deadly hate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But gazed on their harmes, not pittying their estate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And then those Knights he humbly did beseech</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To stay their hands, till he awhile had spoken;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who lookt a little up at that his speech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet would not let their battell so be broken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both greedie fiers on other to be wroken:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet he to them so earnestly did call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And them conjur’d by some well knowen token,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they at last their wrothfull hands let fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Content to heare him speake, and glad to rest withall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>First he desir’d their cause of strife to see:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They said, it was for love of Florimell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Ah gentle Knights!” (quoth he) “how may that bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And she so farre astray, as none can tell?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Fond Squire,” full angry then sayd Paridell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Seest not the Ladie there before thy face?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He looked backe, and, her avizing well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weend, as he said, by that her outward grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That fayrest Florimell was present there in place.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Glad man was he to see that joyous sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For none alive but joy’d in Florimell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lowly to her lowting thus behight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Fayrest of faire, that fairenesse doest excell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This happie day I have to greete you well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which you safe I see, whom thousand late</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Misdoubted lost through mischiefe that befell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long may you live in health and happie state!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She litle answer’d him, but lightly did aggrate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then, turning to those Knights, he gan anew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“And you, Sir Blandamour, and Paridell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">1 hat for this Ladie, present in your vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have rays’d this cruell warre and outrage fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Certes, me seemes, bene not advised well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But rather ought in friendship for her sake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To joyne your force, their forces to repell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seeke perforce her from you both to take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of your gotten spoyle their owne triumph to make.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereat Sir Blandamour, with countenance sterne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All full of wrath, thus fiercely him bespake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Aread, thou Squire, that I the man may learne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That dare fro me thinke Florimell to take!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Not one,” (quoth he) “but many doe partake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Herein; as thus: It lately so befell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Satyran a girdle did uptake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well knowne to appertaine to Florimell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which for her sake he wore, as him beseemed well.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But, when as she her selfe was lost and gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full many knights, that loved her like deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereat did greatly grudge, that he alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That lost faire Ladies ornament should weare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gan therefore close spight to him to beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he to shun, and stop vile envies sting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath lately caus’d to be proclaim’d each where</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A solemne feast, with publike turneying,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To which all knights with them their Ladies are to bring:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And of them all she, that is fayrest found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall have that golden girdle for reward;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of those Knights, who is most stout on ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall to that fairest Ladie be prefard.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since therefore she her selfe is now your ward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To you that ornament of hers pertaines</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against all those that chalenge it to gard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And save her honour with your ventrous paines:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That shall you win more glory than ye here find gaines.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When they the reason of his words had hard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They gan abate the rancour of their rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with their honours and their loves regard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The furious flames of malice to asswage.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho each to other did his faith engage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like faithfull friends thenceforth to joyne in one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all their force, and battell strong to wage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst all those knights, as their professed fone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That chaleng’d ought in Florimell, save they alone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So, well accorded, forth they rode together</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In friendly sort that lasted but a while;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of all old dislikes they made faire weather;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet all was forg’d and spred with golden foyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That under it hidde hate and hollow guyle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne certes can that friendship long endure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">However gay and goodly be the style,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That doth ill cause or evill end enure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For vertue is the band that bindeth harts most sure.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus as they marched all in close disguise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of fayned love, they chaunst to overtake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two knights that lincked rode in lovely wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if they secret counsels did partake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And each not farre behinde him had his make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weete, two Ladies of most goodly hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That twixt themselves did gentle purpose make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unmindfull both of that discordfull crew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which with speedie pace did after them pursew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who, as they now approched nigh at hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deeming them doughtie, as they did appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They sent that Squire afore, to understand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What mote they be: who, viewing them more neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Returned readie newes, that those same weare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two of the prowest Knights in Faery lond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And those two Ladies their two lovers deare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Couragious Cambell, and stout Triamond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Canacee and Cambine linckt in lovely bond.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whylome, as antique stories tellen us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those two were foes the fellonest on ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And battell made the dreddest daungerous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ever shrilling trumpet did resound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though now their acts be no where to be found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As that renowmed Poet them compyled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With warlike numbers and Heroicke sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dan Chaucer, well of English undefyled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Fames eternall beadroll worthie to be fyled.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But wicked Time that all good thoughts doth waste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And workes of noblest wits to nought outweare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That famous moniment hath quite defaste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And robd the world of threasure endlesse deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which mote have enriched all us heare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O cursed Eld! the cankerworme of writs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How may these rimes, so rude as doth appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hope to endure, sith workes of heavenly wits</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are quite devourd, and brought to nought by little bits?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then pardon, O most sacred happie spirit!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I thy labours lost may thus revive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And steale from thee the meede of thy due merit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none durst ever whilest thou wast alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And being dead in vaine yet many strive:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne dare I like; but, through infusion sweete</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of thine owne spirit which doth in me survive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I follow here the footing of thy feete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That with thy meaning so I may the rather meete.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Cambelloes sister was fayre Canacee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was the learnedst Ladie in her dayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well scene in everie science that mote bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every secret worke of natures wayes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In wittie riddles, and in wise soothsayes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In power of herbes, and tunes of beasts and burds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, that augmented all her other prayse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She modest was in all her deedes and words,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wondrous chast of life, yet lov’d of Knights and Lords.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Full many Lords and many Knights her loved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet she to none of them her liking lent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever was with fond affection moved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But rul’d her thoughts with goodly governement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For dread of blame and honours blemishment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke unto her lookes a law she made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none of them once out of order went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But like to warie Centonels well stayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still watcht on every side, of secret foes affrayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So much the more as she refusd to love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So much the more she loved was and sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That oftentimes unquiet strife did move</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst her lovers, and great quarrels wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That oft for her in bloudie armes they fought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which whenas Cambell, that was stout and wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perceiv’d would breede great mischiefe, he bethought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How to prevent the perill that mote rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And turne both him and her to honour, in this wise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One day, when all that troupe of warlike wooers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Assembled were to weet whose she should bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All mightie men and dreadfull derring-dooers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(The harder it to make them well agree)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst them all this end he did decree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, of them all which love to her did make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They by consent should chose the stoutest three</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with himselfe should combat for her sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of them all the viclour should his sister take.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Bold was the chalenge, as himselfe was bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And courage full of haughtie hardiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Approved oft in perils manifold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he atchiev’d to his great ornament;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yet his sisters skill unto him lent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most confidence and hope of happie speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Conceived by a ring which she him sent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, mongst the manie vertues which we reed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had power to staunch al wounds that mortally did bleed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Well was that rings great vertue knowen to all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That dread thereof and his redoubted might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did all that youthly rout so much appall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none of them durst undertake the fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More wise they weend to make of love delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then life to hazard for faire Ladies looke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet uncertaine by such outward sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though for her sake they all that perill tooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether she would them love, or in her liking brooke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Amongst those knights there were three brethren bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Three bolder brethren never were yborne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Borne of one mother in one happie mold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Borne at one burden in one happie morne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrise happie mother, and thrise happie morne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That bore three such, three such not to be fond!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her name was Agape, whose children werne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All three as one; the first hight Priamond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The second Dyamond, the youngest Triamond.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Stout Priamond, but not so strong to strike;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strong Diamond, but not so stout a knight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Triamond was stout and strong alike:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On horsebacke used Triamond to fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Priamond on foote had more delight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But horse and foote knew Diamond to wield:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With curtaxe used Diamond to smite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Triamond to handle speare and shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But speare and curtaxe both usd Priamond in field.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>These three did love each other dearely well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with so firme affection were allyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if but one soule in them all did dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which did her powre into three parts divyde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like three faire branches budding farre and wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from one roote deriv’d their vitall sap:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And like that roote that doth her life divide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their mother was; and had full blessed hap</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These three so noble babes to bring forth at one clap.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Their mother was a Fay, and had the skill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of secret things, and all the powres of nature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which she by art could use unto her will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to her service bind each living creature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through secret understanding of their feature.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereto she was right faire, whenso her face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She list discover, and of goodly stature:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she, as Fayes are wont, in privie place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did spend her dayes, and lov’d in forests wyld to space.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There on a day a noble youthly knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeking adventures in the salvage wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did by great fortune get of her the sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As she sate carelesse by a cristall flood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Combing her golden lockes, as seernd her good;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unawares upon her laying hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That strove in vaine him long to have withstood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oppressed her, and there (as it is told)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Got these three lovely babes, that prov’d three champions bold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which she with her long fostred in that wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that to ripenesse of mans state they grew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then shewing forth signes of their fathers blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They loved armes, and knighthood did ensew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeking adventures where they anie knew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when their mother saw, she gan to dout</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their safetie; least by searching daungers new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rash provoking perils all about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their days mote be abridged through their corage stout.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therefore desirous th’end of all their dayes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To know, and them t’enlarge with long extent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By wondrous skill and many hidden wayes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the three fatall sisters house she went.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Farre under ground from tracl: of living went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Downe in the bottome of the deepe Abysse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where Demogorgon, in dull darknesse pent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Farre from the view of gods and heavens bliss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hideous Chaos keepes, their dreadfull dwelling is.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There she them found all sitting round about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The direfull distaffe standing in the mid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with unwearied fingers drawing out</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The lines of life, from living knowledge hid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sad Clotho held the rocke, the whiles the thrid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By griesly Lachesis was spun with paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That cruell Atropos eftsoones undid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With cursed knife cutting the twist in twaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most wretched men, whose dayes depend on thrids so vaine!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She, them saluting, there by them sate still</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beholding how the thrids of life they span:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when at last she had beheld her fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Trembling in heart, and looking pale and wan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her cause of comming she to tell began.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom fierce Atropos: “Bold Fay, that durst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Come see the secret of the life of man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well worthie thou to be of Jove accurst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke thy childrens thrids to be asunder burst!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whereat she sore affrayd, yet her besought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To graunt her boone, and rigour to abate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she might see her childrens thrids forth brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And know the measure of their utmost date</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To them ordained by eternall fate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Clotho graunting shewed her the same.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That when she saw, it did her much amate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see their thrids so thin as spiders frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke so short, that seemd their ends out shortly came.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She then began them humbly to intreate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To draw them longer out, and better twine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That so their lives might be prolonged late:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Lachesis thereat gan to repine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sayd; “Fond dame, that deem’st of things divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As of humane, that they may altred bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chaung’d at pleasure for those impes of thine!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not so; for what the Fates do once decree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not all the gods can chaunge, nor Jove him self can free!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Then since” (quoth she) “the terme of each mans life</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For nought may lessened nor enlarged bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Graunt this; that when ye shred with fatall knife</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His line, which is the eldest of the three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which is of them the shortest, as I see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones his life may passe into the next:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, when the next shall likewise ended bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That both their lives may likewise be annext</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the third, that his may so be trebly wext.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They graunted it; and then that carefull Fay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Departed thence with full contented mynd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, comming home, in warlike fresh aray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them found all three according to their kynd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But unto them what destinie was assynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or how their lives were eekt, she did not tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But evermore, when she fit time could fynd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She warned them to tend their safeties well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And love each other deare, what ever them befell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So did they surely during all their dayes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And never discord did amongst them fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which much augmented all their other praise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now, t’ increase affection naturall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In love of Canacee theyjoyned all:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon which ground this same great battell grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great matter growing of beginning small,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which, for length, I will not here pursew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But rather will reserve it for a Canto new.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-3" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The Battell twixt three Brethren with</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Cambell for Canacee:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cambina with true friendships bond</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Doth their long strife agree.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>O! why doe wretched men so much desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To draw their dayes unto the utmost date,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doe not rather wish them soone expire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Knowing the miserie of their estate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thousand perills which them still awate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tossing them like a boate amid the mayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That every houre they knocke at deathes gate?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he that happie seemes, and least in payne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet is as nigh his end as he that most doth playne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therefore this Fay I hold but fond and vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which, in seeking for her children three</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long life, thereby did more prolong their paine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet whilest they lived none did ever see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More happie creatures then they seem’d to bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor more ennobled for their courtesie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That made them dearely lov’d of each degree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne more renowmed for their chevalrie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That made them dreaded much of all men farre and nie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>These three that hardie chalenge tooke in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Canacee with Cambell for to fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The day was set, that all might understand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pledges pawnd the same to keepe aright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That day, the dreddest day that living wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did ever see upon this world to shine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So soone as heavens window shewed light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These warlike Champions, all in armour shine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Assembled were in field the chalenge to define.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The field with listes was all about enclos’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To barre the prease of people farre away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at th’one side sixe judges were dispos’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To view and deeme the deedes of armes that day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on the other side, in fresh aray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fayre Canacee upon a stately stage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was set, to see the fortune of that fray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to be scene, as his most worthie wage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That could her purchase with his lives adventur’d gage.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then entred Cambell first into the list,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With stately steps and fearelesse countenance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if the conquest his he surely wist.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone after did the brethren three advance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In brave aray and goodly amenance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With scutchins gilt and banners broad displayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, marching thrise in warlike ordinance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrise lowted lowly to the noble Mayd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whiles shril trompets and loud clarions sweetly playd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which doen, the doughty chalenger came forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All arm’d to point, his chalenge to abet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst whom Sir Priamond, with equall worth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And equall armes, himselfe did forward set.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A trompet blew; they both together met</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With dreadfull force and furious intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Carelesse of perill in their fiers affret,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if that life to losse they had forelent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cared not to spare that should be shortly spent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Right prafticke was Sir Priamond in fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And throughly skild in use of shield and speare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne lesse approved was Cambelloes might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne lesse his skill in weapons did appeare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hard it was to weene which harder were.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full many mightie strokes on either side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were sent, that seemed death in them to beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But they were both so watchfull and well eyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they avoyded were, and vainely by did slyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet one, of many, was so strongly bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By Priamond, that with unluckie glaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through Cambels shoulder it unwarely went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That forced him his shield to disadvaunce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much was he grieved with that gracelesse chaunce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet from the wound no drop of bloud there fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wondrous paine, that did the more enhaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His haughtie courage to avengement fell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smart daunts not mighty harts, but makes them more to swell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that, his poynant speare he fierce aventred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With doubled force close underneath his shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That through the mayles into his thigh it entred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, there arresting, readie way did yield</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For bloud to gush forth on the grassie field;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he for paine himselfe n’ote right upreare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But too and fro in great amazement reel’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like an old Oke, whose pith and sap is scare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At puffe of every storme doth stagger here and theare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom so dismayd when Cambell had espide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Againe he drove at him with double might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nought mote stay the steele, till in his side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The mortall point most cruelly empight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where fast infixed, whilest he sought by slight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It forth to wrest, the staffe asunder brake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And left the head behinde: with which despight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He all enrag’d his shivering speare did shake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And charging him afresh thus felly him bespake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Lo! faitour, there thy meede unto thee take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The meede of thy mischalenge and abet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not for thine owne, but for thy sisters sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have I thus long thy life unto thee let:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to forbeare doth not forgive the det.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wicked weapon heard his wrathfull vow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, passing forth with furious affiret,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pierst through his bever quite into his brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That with the force it backward forced him to bow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith asunder in the midst it brast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his hand nought but the troncheon left;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other halfe, behind yet sticking fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of his headpeece Cambell fiercely reft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with such furie backe at him it heft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That making way unto his dearest life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His weasand-pipe it through his gorget cleft.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence streames of purple bloud issuing rife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let forth his wearie ghost, and made an end of strife.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His wearie ghost assoyld from fleshly band</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did not, as others wont, directly fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto her rest in Plutoes griesly land;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne into ayre did vanish presently,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne chaunged was into a starre in sky;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But through traduclion was eftsoones derived,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as his mother prayd the Destinie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into his other brethren that survived,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In whom he liv’d anew, of former life deprived.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when on ground his brother next beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though sad and sorie for so heavy sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet leave unto his sorrow did not yeeld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But rather stir’d to vengeance and despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through secret feeling of his generous spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rusht fiercely forth the battell to renew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As in reversion of his brothers right;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chalenging the Virgin as his dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His foe was soone addrest: the trompets freshly blew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that they both together fiercely met,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if that each ment other to devoure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with their axes both so sorely bet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That neither plate nor mayle, where as their powre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They felt, could once sustaine the hideous stowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But rived were like rotten wood asunder;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilest through their rifts the ruddie bloud did showre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fire did flash, like lightning after thunder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That fild the lookers on attonce with ruth and wonder.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when two Tygers prickt with hungers rage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have by good fortune found some beasts fresh spoyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which they weene their famine to asswage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gaine a feastfull guerdon of their toyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both falling out doe stirre up strifefull broyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cruell battell twixt themselves doe make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles neither lets the other touch the soyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But either sdeignes with other to partake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So cruelly these Knights strove for that Ladies sake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Full many strokes, that mortally were ment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles were enterchaunged twixt them two;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet they were all with so good wariment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or warded, or avoyded and let goe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That still the life stood fearelesse of her foe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till Diamond, disdeigning long delay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of doubtfull fortune wavering to and fro,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Resolv’d to end it one or other way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And heav’d his murdrous axe at him with mighty sway.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The dreadfull stroke, in case it had arrived</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where it was ment, (so deadly it was ment)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The soule had sure out of his bodie rived,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stinted all the strife incontinent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Cambels fate that fortune did prevent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, seeing it at hand, he swarv’d asyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so gave way unto his fell intent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, missing of the marke which he had eyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was with the force nigh feld, whilst his right foot did slyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when a Vulture greedie of his pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through hunger long that hart to him doth lend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strikes at an Heron with all his bodies sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from his force seemes nought may it defend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The warie fowle, that spies him toward bend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His dreadfull souse, avoydes it, shunning light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And maketh him his wing in vaine to spend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with the weight of his owne weeldlesse might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He falleth nigh to ground, and scarse recovereth flight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which faire adventure when Cambello spide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full lightly, ere himselfe he could recower</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From daungers dread to ward his naked side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He can let drive at him with all his power,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his axe him smote in evill hower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from his shoulders quite his head he reft:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The headlesse tronke, as heedlesse of that stower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stood still awhile, and his fast footing kept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till, feeling life to fayle, it fell, and deadly slept.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They which that piteous spectacle beheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were much amaz’d the headlesse tronke to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stand up so long, and weapon vaine to weld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unweeting of the Fates divine decree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For lifes succession in those brethren three.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For notwithstanding that one soule was reft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet had the bodie not dismembred bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It would have lived, and revived eft;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, finding no fit seat, the lifelesse corse it left.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It left; but that same soule which therein dwelt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Streight entring into Triamond him fild</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With double life and griefe; which when he felt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one whose inner parts had bene ythrild</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With point of steele that close his hartbloud spild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He lightly lept out of his place of rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rushing forth into the emptie field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against Cambello fiercely him addrest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, him affronting soone, to fight was readie prest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Well mote ye wonder how that noble Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After he had so often wounded beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could stand on foot now to renew the fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But had ye then him forth advauncing scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some newborne wight ye would him surely weene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So fresh he seemed and so fierce in sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as a Snake, whom wearie winters teene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath worne to nought, now feeling sommers might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Casts off his ragged skin and freshly doth him dight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All was through vertue of the ring he wore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which not onely did not from him let</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One drop of bloud to fall, but did restore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His weakned powers, and dulled spirits whet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through working of the stone therein yset.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Else how could one of equall might with most,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against so many no lesse mightie met,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Once thinke to match three such on equall cost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three such as able were to match a puissant host?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet nought thereof was Triamond adredde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne desperate of glorious victorie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But sharpely him assayld, and sore bestedde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With heapes of strokes, which he at him let flie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As thicke as hayle forth poured from the skie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He stroke, he soust, he foynd, he hewd, he lasht,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did his yron brond so fast applie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from the same the fierie sparkles flasht,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As fast as water-sprinkles gainst a rocke are dasht.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Much was Cambello daunted with his blowes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So thicke they fell, and forcibly were sent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he was forst from daunger of the throwes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Backe to retire, and somewhat to relent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till th’ heat of his fierce furie he had spent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when for want of breath gan to abate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He then afresh with new encouragement</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did him assayle, and mightily amate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As fast as forward erst now backward to retrate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like as the tide, that comes fro th’ Ocean mayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flowes up the Shenan with contrarie forse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And over-ruling him in his owne rayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drives backe the current of his kindly course,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And makes it seeme to have some other sourse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when the floud is spent, then backe againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His borrowed waters forst to redisbourse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He sends the sea his owne with double gaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tribute eke withall, as to his Soveraine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus did the battell varie to and fro,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With diverse fortune doubtfull to be deemed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now this the better had, now had his fo;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then he halfe vanquisht, then the other seemed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet victors both them selves alwayes esteemed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the while the disentrayled blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adowne their sides like litle rivers stremed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with the wasting of his vitall flood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sir Triamond at last full faint and feeble stood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Cambell still more strong and greater grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne felt his blood to wast, ne powres emperisht,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through that rings vertue, that with vigour new</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still when as he enfeebled was, him cherisht,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all his wounds, and all his bruses guarisht;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as a withered tree, through husbands toyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is often scene full freshly to have florisht,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fruitfull apples to have borne awhile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As fresh as when it first was planted in the soyle.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Through which advantage, in his strength he rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And smote the other with so wondrous might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That through the seame, which did his hauberk close,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into his throate and life it pierced quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That downe he fell as dead in all mens sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet dead he was not, yet he sure did die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As all men do, that lose the living spright.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So did one soule out of his bodie flie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto her native home from mortall miserie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But nathelesse, whilst all the lookers-on</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him dead behight, as he to all appeard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All unawares he started up anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one that had out of a dreame bene reard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fresh assayld his foe: who halfe affeard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of th’uncouth sight, as he some ghost had scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stood still amaz’d, holding his idle sweard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till, having often by him stricken beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He forced was to strike, and save himselfe from teene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet from thenceforth more warily he fought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one in feare the Stygian gods t’offend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne followd on so fast, but rather sought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him selfe to save, and daunger to defend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then life and labour both in vaine to spend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Triamond perceiving weened sure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan to faint toward the battels end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that he should not long on foote endure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A signe which did to him the victorie assure.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whereof full blith eftsoones his mightie hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He heav’d on high, in mind with that same blow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make an end of all that did withstand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Cambell seeing come was nothing slow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him selfe to save from that so deadly throw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at that instant reaching forth his sweard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Close underneath his shield, that scarce did show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stroke him, as he his hand to strike upreard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In th’arm-pit full, that through both sides the wound appeard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet still that direfull stroke kept on his way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, falling heavie on Cambelloes crest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strooke him so hugely that in swowne he lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his head an hideous wound imprest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sure, had it not happily found rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the brim of his brode-plated shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It would have cleft his braine downe to his brest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So both at once fell dead upon the field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And each to other seemd the vidtorie to yield.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when as all the lookers-on beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They weened sure the warre was at an end;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Judges rose, and Marshals of the field</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Broke up the listes, their armes away to rend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Canacee gan wayle her dearest frend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All suddenly they both upstarted light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The one out of the swownd, which him did blend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other breathing now another spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fiercely each assayling gan afresh to fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Long while they then continued in that wize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if but then the battell had begonne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strokes, wounds, wards, weapons, all they did despise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne either car’d to ward, or perill shonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Desirous both to have the battell donne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne either cared life to save or spill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne which of them did winne, ne which were wonne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So wearie both of fighting had their fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That life it selfe seemd loathsome, and long safetie ill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whilst thus the case in doubtfull ballance hong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unsure to whether side it would incline,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all mens eyes and hearts, which there among</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stood gazing, filled were with rufull tine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And secret feare, to see their fatall fine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All suddenly they heard a troublous noyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemd some perilous tumult to desine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Confusd with womens cries and shouts of boyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as the troubled Theatres oftimes annoy es.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereat the Champions both stood still a space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weeten what that sudden clamour ment:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lo! where they spyde with speedie whirling pace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One in a charet of straunge furniment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Towards them driving, like a storme out sent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The charet decked was in wondrous wize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With gold and many a gorgeous ornament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After the Persian Monarks antique guize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as the maker selfe could best by art devize.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Much more of price and of more gratious powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is this, then that same water of Ardenne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which Rinaldo drunck in happie howre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Described by that famous Tuscane penne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that had might to change the hearts of men</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fro love to hate, a change of evill choise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But this doth hatred make in love to brenne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heavy heart with comfort doth rejoyce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who would not to this vertue rather yeeld his voice?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last arriving by the listes side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee with her rod did softly smite the raile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which straight flew ope, and gave her way to ride.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones out of her Coch she gan availe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pacing fairely forth did bid all haile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First to her brother, whom she loved deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That so to see him made her heart to quaile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And next to Cambell, whose sad ruefull cheare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made her to change her hew, and hidden love t’appeare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They lightly her requit, (for small delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They had as then her long to entertaine)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eft them turned both againe to fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when she saw, downe on the bloudy plaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her selfe she threw, and teares gan shed amaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst her teares immixing prayers meeke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with her prayers reasons, to restraine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From blouddy strife, and blessed peace to seeke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By all that unto them was deare, did them beseeke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when as all might nought with them prevaile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shee smote them lightly with her powrefull wand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then suddenly, as if their hearts did faile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their wrathfull blades downe fell out of their hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And they, like men astonisht, still did stand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus whilest their minds were doubtfully distraught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mighty spirites bound with mightier band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her golden cup to them for drinke she raught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereof, full glad for thirst, ech drunk an harty draught;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Of which so soone as they once tasted had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wonder it is that sudden change to see:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Instead of strokes, each other kissed glad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lovely haulst, from feare of treason free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And plighted hands for ever friends to be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When all men saw this sudden change of things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So mortall foes so friendly to agree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For passing joy, which so great marvaile brings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They all gan shout aloud, that all the heaven rings.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All which when gentle Canacee beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hast she from her lofty chaire descended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet what sudden tidings was befeld:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where when she saw that cruell war so ended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And deadly foes so faithfully affrended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In lovely wise she gan that Lady greet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which had so great dismay so well amended:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, entertaining her with curt’sies meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Profest to her true friendship and affection sweet.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus when they all accorded goodly were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The trumpets sounded, and they all arose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence to depart with glee and gladsome chere.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those warlike champions both together chose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Homeward to march, themselves there to repose:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wise Cambina, taking by her side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Canacee, as fresh as morning rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto her Coch remounting, home did ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Admir’d of all the people and much glorifide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Where making joyous feast theire daies they spent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In perfect love, devoide of hatefull strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Allide with bands of mutuall couplement;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Triamond had Canacee to wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With whom he ledd a long and happie life;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Cambel tooke Cambina to his fere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which as life were to each other liefe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So all alike did love, and loved were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That since their dayes such lovers were not found elswhere.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-4" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Satyrane makes a Tourneyment</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">For love of Florimell:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Britomart winnes the prize from all,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And Artegall doth quell.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It often fals, (as here it earst befell)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That mortall foes doe turne to faithfull frends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And friends profest are chaungd to foemen fell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cause of both, of both their minds depends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And th’end of both likewise of both their ends:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For enmitie, that of no ill proceeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But of occasion, with th’occasion ends;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And friendship, which a faint affection breeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without regard of good, dyes like ill grounded seeds.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That well (me seemes) appeares, by that of late</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Twixt Cambell and Sir Triamond befell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As als by this, that now a new debate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stird up twixt Blandamour and Paridell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which by course befals me here to tell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who having those two other Knights espide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Marching afore, as ye remember well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sent forth their Squire to have them both descride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke those masked Ladies riding them beside.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who backe returning told, as he had scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they were doughtie knights of dreaded name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And those two Ladies their two loves unseene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therefore wisht them without blot or blame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To let them passe at will, for dread of shame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Blandamour full of vainglorious spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rather stird by his discordfull Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon them gladly would have prov’d his might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that he yet was sore of his late lucklesse fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet nigh approching he them fowle bespake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disgracing them, him selfe thereby to grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As was his wont: so weening way to make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Ladies love, where so he came in place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with lewd termes their lovers to deface.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose sharpe provokement them incenst so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That both were bent t’avenge his usage base,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gan their shields addresse them selves afore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For evill deedes may better then bad words be bore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But faire Cambina with perswasions myld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did mitigate the fiercenesse of their mode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That for the present they were reconcyld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gan to treate of deeds of armes abrode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strange adventures, all the way they rode:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst the which they told, as then befell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that great turney which was blazed brode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that rich girdle of faire Florimell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The prize of her which did in beautie most excell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To which folke-mote they all with one consent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith each of them his Ladie had him by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose beautie each of them thought excellent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Agreed to travell, and their fortunes try.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So as they passed forth they did espy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One in bright armes, with ready speare in rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That toward them his course seem’d to apply:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst whom Sir Paridell himselfe addrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him weening, ere he nigh approcht, to have represt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which th’other seeing gan his course relent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And vaunted speare eftsoones to disadvaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if he naught but peace and pleasure ment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now falne into their fellowship by chance:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat they shewed curteous countenaunce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So as he rode with them accompanide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His roving eie did on the Lady glaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Blandamour had riding by his side:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom sure he weend, that he some-wher tofore had eide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It was to weete that snowy Florimell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Ferrau late from Braggadochio wonne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom he now seeing, her remembred well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How having reft her from the witches sonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He soone her lost: wherefore he now begunne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To challenge her anew, as his owne prize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom formerly he had in battell wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And proffer made by force her to reprize:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which scornefull offer Blandamour gan soone despize;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And said, “Sir Knight, sith ye this Lady clame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom he that hath were loth to lose so light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(For so to lose a Lady were great shame)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yee shall her winne, as I have done, in fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lo! shee shall be placed here in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Together with this Hag beside her set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That who so winnes her may her have by right;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he shall have the Hag that is ybet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with her alwaies ride, till he another get.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That offer pleased all the company:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So Florimell with Ate forth was brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At which they all gan laugh full merrily;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Braggadochio said, he never thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For such an Hag, that seemed worse then nought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His person to emperill so in fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if to match that Lady they had sought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another like, that were like faire and bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His life he then would spend to justifie his right.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At which his vaine excuse they all gan smile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As scorning his unmanly cowardize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Florimell him fowly gan revile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That for her sake refus’d to enterprize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The battell, offred in so knightly wize:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Ate eke provokt him privily</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With love of her, and shame of such mesprize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But nought he car’d for friend or enemy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For in base mind nor friendship dwels nor enmity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Cambell thus did shut up all in jest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Brave Knights and Ladies, certes, ye doe wrong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To stirre up strife, when most us needeth rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That we may us reserve both fresh and strong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the Turneiment which is not long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When who so list to fight may fight his fill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till then your challenges ye may prolong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then it shall be tried, if ye will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether shall have the Hag, or hold the Lady still.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They all agreed: so, turning all to game</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pleasaunt bord, they past forth on their way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all that while, where so they rode or came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That masked Mock-knight was their sport and play.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that at length, upon th’appointed day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the place of turneyment they came;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where they before them found in fresh aray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Manie a brave knight and manie a daintie dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Assembled for to get the honour of that game.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There this faire crewe arriving did divide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them selves asunder: Blandamour with those</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his on th’one, the rest on th’other side.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But boastful Braggadochio rather chose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For glorie vaine, their fellowship to lose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That men on him the more might gaze alone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rest themselves in troupes did else dispose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as it seemed best to every one;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The knights in couples marcht with ladies linckt attone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then first of all forth came Sir Satyrane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bearing that precious relicke in an arke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of gold, that bad eyes might it not prophane:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which drawing softly forth out of the darke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He open shewd, that all men it mote marke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A gorgeous girdle, curiously embost</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With pearle and precious stone, worth many a marke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet did the workmanship farre passe the cost:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was the same which lately Florimel had lost.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The same aloft he hung in open vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be the prize of beautie and of might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which eftsoones discovered, to it drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The eyes of all, allur’d with close delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hearts quite robbed with so glorious sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all men threw out vowes and wishes vaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrise happie Ladie, and thrise happie knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them seemd that could so goodly riches gaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So worthie of the perill, worthy of the paine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then tooke the bold Sir Satyrane in hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An huge great speare, such as he wont to wield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, vauncing forth from all the other band</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of knights, addrest his maiden-headed shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shewing him selfe all ready for the field.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst whom there singled from the other side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Painim knight that well in armes was skild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And had in many a battell oft bene tride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right Bruncheval the bold, who fiersly forth did ride.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So furiously they both together met,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That neither could the others force sustaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As two fierce Buls, that strive the rule to get</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the heard, meete with so hideous maine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That both rebutted tumble on the plaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So these two champions to the ground were feld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where in a maze they both did long remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in their hands their idle troncheons held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which neither able were to wag, or once to weld.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when the noble Ferramont espide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He pricked forth in ayd of Satyran;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him against Sir Blandamour did ride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all the strength and stifnesse that he can.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the more strong and stiffely that he ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So much more sorely to the ground he fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That on an heape were tumbled horse and man:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto whose rescue forth rode Paridell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But him likewise with that same speare he eke did quell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which Braggadocchio seeing had no will</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hasten greatly to his parties ayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Albee his turne were next; but stood there still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one that seemed doubtfull or dismayd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Triamond, halfe wroth to see him staid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sternly stept forth and raught away his speare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which so sore he Ferramont assaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That horse and man to ground he quite did beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That neither could in hast themselves againe upreare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which to avenge Sir Devon him did dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with no better fortune then the rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For him likewise he quickly downe did smight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after him Sir Douglas him addrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after him Sir Palimord forth prest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But none of them against his strokes could stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, all the more, the more his praise increst:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For either they were left uppon the land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or went away sore wounded of his haplesse hand.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now by this Sir Satyrane abraid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the swowne, in which too long he lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And looking round about, like one dismaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When as he saw the mercilesse affray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which doughty Triamond had wrought that day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the noble Knights of Maidenhead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mighty heart did almost rend in tway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For very gall, that rather wholly dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Himselfe he wisht have beene, then in so bad a stead.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones he gan to gather up around</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His weapons which lay scattered all abrode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, as it fell, his steed he ready found;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On whom remounting fiercely forth he rode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like sparke of fire that from the andvile glode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There where he saw the valiant Triamond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Chasing, and laying on them heavy lode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none his force were able to withstond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So dreadfull were his strokes, so deadly was his hond.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that, at him his beam-like speare he aimed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thereto all his power and might applide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wicked steele, for mischiefe first ordained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And having now misfortune got for guide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Staid not till it arrived in his side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therein made a very griesly wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That streames of blood his armour all bedide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much was he daunted with that direfull stound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That scarse he him upheld from falling in a swound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet, as he might, himselfe he soft withdrew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the field, that none perceiv’d it plaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan the part of Chalengers anew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To range the field, and viftorlike to raine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none against them battell durst maintaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By that the gloomy evening on them fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That forced them from fighting to refraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And trumpets sound to cease did them compell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So Satyrane that day was judg’d to beare the bell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The morrow next the Turney gan anew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with the first the hardy Satyrane</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Appear’d in place, with all his noble crew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On th’other side full many a warlike swaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Assembled were, that glorious prize to gaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But mongst them all was not Sir Triamond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unable he new battell to darraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through grievaunce of his late received wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That doubly did him grieve when so himselfe he found.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which Cambell seeing, though he could not salve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne done undoe, yet, for to salve his name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And purchase honour in his friends behalve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This goodly counterfesaunce he did frame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The shield and armes, well knowne to be the same</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Triamond had worne, unwares to wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to his friend unwist, for doubt of blame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If he misdid, he on himselfe did dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That none could him discerne; and so went forth to fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There Satyrane Lord of the field he found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Triumphing in great joy and jolity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst whom none able was to stand on ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That much he gan his glorie to envy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cast t’avenge his friends indignity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A mightie speare eftsoones at him he bent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, seeing him come on so furiously,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Met him mid-way with equall hardiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That forcibly to ground they both together went.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They up againe them selves can lightly reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to their tryed swords them selves betake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which they wrought such wondrous marvels there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the rest it did amazed make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne any dar’d their perill to partake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now cuffing close, now chacing to and fro,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now hurtling round advantage for to take:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As two wild Boares together grapling go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chaufing and foming choler each against his fo.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So as they courst, and turneyd here and theare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It chaunst Sir Satyrane his steed at last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether through foundring or through sodein feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To stumble, that his rider nigh he cast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which vauntage Cambell did pursue so fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, ere him selfe he had recovered well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So sore he sowst him on the compast creast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That forced him to leave his loftie sell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rudely tumbling downe under his horse-feete fell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lightly Cambello leapt downe from his steed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For to have rent his shield and armes away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That whylome wont to be the victors meed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When all unwares he felt an hideous sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of many swords that lode on him did lay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An hundred knights had him enclosed round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To rescue Satyrane out of his pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which at once huge strokes on him did pound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In hope to take him prisoner, where he stood on ground.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He with their multitude was nought dismayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with stout courage turnd upon them all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his brondiron round about him layd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which he dealt large almes, as did befall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as a Lion, that by chaunce doth fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the hunters toile, doth rage and rore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In royall heart disdaining to be thrall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all in vaine: for what might one do more?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They have him taken captive, though it grieve him sore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whereof when newes to Triamond was brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There as he lay, his wound he soone forgot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And starting up streight for his armour sought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In vaine he sought, for there he found it not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cambello it away before had got.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cambelloes armes therefore he on him threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lightly issewd forth to take his lot.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There he in troupe found all that warlike crew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leading his friend away, full sorie to his vew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Into the thickest of that knightly preasse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He thrust, and smote downe all that was betweene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Caried with fervent zeale: ne did he ceasse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that he came where he had Cambell scene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like captive thral two other Knights atweene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There he amongst them cruell havocke makes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they, which lead him, soone enforced beene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To let him loose to save their proper stakes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, being freed, from one a weapon fiercely takes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that he drives at them with dreadfull might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both in remembrance of his friends late harme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in revengement of his owne despight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So both together give a new allarme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if but now the battell wexed warme.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As when two greedy Wolves doe breake by force</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into an heard, farre from the husband farme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They spoile and ravine without all remorse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So did these two through all the field their foes enforce.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Fiercely they followd on their bolde emprize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till trumpets sound did warne them all to rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then all with one consent did yeeld the prize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Triamond and Cambell as the best.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Triamond to Cambell it relest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Cambell it to Triamond transferd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each labouring t’advance the others gest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And make his praise before his owne preferd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that the doome was to another day differd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The last day came, when all those knightes againe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Assembled were their deedes of armes to shew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full many deedes that day were shewed plaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Satyrane, bove all the other crew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His wondrous worth declared in all mens view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For from the first he to the last endured:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And though some while Fortune from him withdrew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet evermore his honour he recured,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with unwearied powre his party still assured.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne was there Knight that ever thought of armes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that his utmost prowesse there made knowen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, by their many wounds and carelesse harmes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By shivered speares, and swords all under strowen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By scattered shields, was easie to be showen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There might ye see loose steeds at randon ronne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose lucklesse riders late were overthrowen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And squiers make hast to helpe their Lords fordonne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But still the Knights of Maidenhead the better wonne;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Till that there entered on the other side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A straunger knight, from whence no man could reed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In quyent disguise, full hard to be descride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all his armour was like salvage weed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With woody mosse bedight, and all his steed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With oaken leaves attrapt, that seemed fit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For salvage wight; and thereto well agreed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His word, which on his ragged shield was writ,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sahagesse sansjinesse, shewing secret wit.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He, at his first incomming, charg’d his spere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At him that first appeared in his sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was to weet the stout Sir Sangliere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who well was knowen to be a valiant Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Approved oft in many a perlous fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him at the first encounter downe he smote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And overbore beyond his crouper quight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after him another Knight, that hote</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sir Brianor, so sore that none him life behote.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then, ere his hand he reard, he overthrew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seven Knights, one after other as they came:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, when his speare was brust, his sword he drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The instrument of wrath, and with the same</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far’d like a lyon in his bloodie game,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hewing and slashing shields and helmets bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And beating downe what ever nigh him came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That every one gan shun his dreadfull sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No lesse then death it selfe, in daungerous affright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Much wondred all men what or whence he came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That did amongst the troupes so tyrannize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And each of other gan inquire his name.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when they could not learne it by no wize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most answerable to his wyld disguize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It seemed him to terme the Salvage Knight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But certes his right name was otherwize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though knowne to few, that Arthegall he hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The doughtiest knight that liv’d that day, and most of might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus was Sir Satyrane with all his band</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By his sole manhood and atchievement stout</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dismay’d, that none of them in field durst stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But beaten were and chased all about.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So he continued all that day throughout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till evening that the Sunne gan downward bend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then rushed forth out of the thickest rout</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A stranger knight, that did his glorie shend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So nought may be esteemed happie till the end.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He at his entrance charg’d his powrefull speare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At Artegall, in middest of his pryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therewith smote him on his Umbriere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So sore, that tombling backe he downe did slyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over his horses taile above a stryde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence litle lust he had to rise againe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Cambell seeing much the same envyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ran at him with all his might and maine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But shortly was likewise scene lying on the plaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whereat full inly wroth was Triamond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cast t’avenge the shame doen to his freend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by his friend himselfe eke soone he fond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In no lesse neede of helpe then him, he weend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which when Blandamour from end to end</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beheld, he woxe therewith displeased sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thought in mind it shortly to amend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His speare he feutred, and at him it bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But with no better fortune then the rest afore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Full many others at him likewise ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all of them likewise dismounted were;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne certes wonder, for no powre of man</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could bide the force of that enchaunted speare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which this famous Britomart did beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which she wondrous deeds of arms atchieved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And overthrew what ever came her neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all those stranger knights full sore agrieved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that late weaker band of chalengers relieved.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like as in sommers day, when raging heat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth burne the earth and boyled rivers drie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all brute beasts, forst to refraine fro meat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe hunt for shade, where shrowded they may lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, missing it, faine from themselves to flic;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All travellers tormented are with paine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A watry cloud doth overcast the skie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And poureth forth a sudden shoure of raine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all the wretched world recomforteth againe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So did the warlike Britomart restore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The prize to knights of Maydenhead that day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which else was like to have bene lost, and bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The prayse of prowesse from them all away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then shrilling trompets loudly gan to bray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bad them leave their labours and long toyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To joyous feast and other gentle play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where beauties prize shold win that pretious spoyle:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where I with sound of trompe will also rest a whyle.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-5" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The Ladies for the girdle strive</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of famous Florimell:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Scudamour; comming to Cares House.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Doth sleepe from him expell.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It hath bene through all ages ever scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with the praise of armes and chevalrie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The prize of beautie still hath joyned beene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that for reasons speciall privitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For either doth on other much relie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he, me seemes, most fit the faire to serve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That can her best defend from villenie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And she most fit his service doth deserve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That fairest is, and from her faith will never swerve.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So fitly now here commeth next in place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After the proofe of prowesse ended well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The controverse of beauties soveraine grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which, to her that doth the most excell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall fall the girdle of faire Florimell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That many wish to win for glorie vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And not for vertuous use, which some doe tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That glorious belt did in it selfe containe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which Ladies ought to love, and seeke for to obtaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That girdle gave the vertue of chast love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wivehood true, to all that did it beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But whosoever contrarie doth prove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might not the same about her middle wcare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But it would loose, or else asunder teare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilome it was (as Faeries wont report)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dame Venus girdle, by her steemed deare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What time she usd to live in wively sort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But layd aside when so she usd her looser sport.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her husband Vulcan whylome for her sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When first he loved her with heart entire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This pretious ornament, they say, did make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wrought in Lemno with unquenched fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And afterwards did for her loves first hire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Give it to her, for ever to remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith to bind lascivious desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And loose affections streightly to restraine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which vertue it for ever after did retaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The same one day, when she her selfe disposd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To visite her beloved Paramoure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The God of warre, she from her middle loosd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And left behind her in her secret bowre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On Acidalian mount, where many an howre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She with the pleasant Graces wont to play.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There Florimell, in her first ages flowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was fostered by those Graces, (as they say)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And brought with her from thence that goodly belt away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That goodly belt was Cestus hight by name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as her life by her esteemed deare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No wonder then, if that to winne the same</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So many Ladies sought, as shall appeare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For pearelesse she was thought that did it beare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now by this their feast all being ended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The judges, which thereto selected were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the Martian field adowne descended</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To deeme this doutfull case, for which they all contended.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But first was question made, which of those Knights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That lately turneyd had the wager wonne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There was it judged, by those worthie wights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Satyrane the first day best had donne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he last ended, having first begonne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The second was to Triamond behight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that he sav’d the viclxmr from fordonne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Cambell viclour was in all mens sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till by mishap he in his foemens hand did light.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The third dayes prize unto that straunger Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom all men term’d Knight of the Hebene speare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Britomart was given by good right;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that with puissant stroke she downe did beare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Salvage Knight that victour was whileare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the rest which had the best afore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the last unconquer’d did appeare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For last is deemed best. To her therefore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fayrest Ladie was adjudgd for Paramore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But thereat greatly grudged Arthegall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And much repynd, that both of vidtors meede</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke of honour she did him forestall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet mote he not withstand what was decreede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But inly thought of that despightfull deede</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fit time t’awaite avenged for to bee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This being ended thus, and all agreed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then next ensew’d the Paragon to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of beauties praise, and yeeld the fayrest her due fee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then first Cambello brought into their view</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His faire Cambina, covered with a veale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, being once withdrawne, most perfect hew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And passing beautie did eftsoones reveale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That able was weake harts away to steale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Next did Sir Triamond unto their sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The face of his deare Canacee unheale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose beauties beame eftsoones did shine so bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That daz’d the eyes of all as with exceeding light.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And after her did Paridell produce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His false Duessa, that she might be scene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who with her forged beautie did seduce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hearts of some that fairest her did weene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As diverse wits affecled divers beene.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then did Sir Ferramont unto them shew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His Lucida, that was full faire and sheene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after these an hundred Ladies moe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Appear’d in place, the which each other did outgoe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All which who so dare thinke for to enchace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him needeth sure a golden pen, I weene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tell the feature of each goodly face:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, since the day that they created beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So many heavenly faces were not scene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Assembled in one place: ne he that thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Chian folke to pourtraicl beauties Queene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By view of all the fairest to him brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So many faire did see as here he might have sought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last, the most redoubted Britonesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her lovely Amoret did open shew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose face, discovered, plainely did expresse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The heavenly pourtraict of bright Angels hew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well weened all, which her that time did vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she should surely beare the bell away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till Blandamour, who thought he had the trew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And very Florimell, did her display,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sight of whom once scene did all the rest dismay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For all afore that seemed fayre and bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now base and contemptible did appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Compar’d to her that shone as Phebes light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst the lesser starres in evening cleare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All that her saw with wonder ravisht weare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And weend no mortall creature she should bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But some celestiall shape that flesh did beare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet all were glad there Florimell to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet thought that Florimell was not so faire as shee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As guilefull Goldsmith that by secret skill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With golden foyle doth finely over-spred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some baser metall, which commend he will</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the vulgar for good gold insted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He much more goodly glosse thereon doth shed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hide his falshood, then if it were trew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So hard this Idole was to be ared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Florimell her selfe in all mens vew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She seem’d to passe: so forged things do fairest shew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then was that golden belt by doome of all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Graunted to her, as to the fayrest Dame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which being brought, about her middle small</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They thought to gird, as best it her became,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by no meanes they could it thereto frame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, ever as they fastned it, it loos’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fell away, as feeling secret blame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full oft about her wast she it enclos’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And it as oft was from about her wast disclos’d:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That all men wondred at the uncouth sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And each one thought as to their fancies came.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she her selfe did thinke it doen for spight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And touched was with secret wrath and shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith, as thing deviz’d her to defame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then many other Ladies likewise tride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About their tender loynes to knit the same;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But it would not on none of them abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when they thought it fast, eftsoones it was untide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when that scornefull Squire of Dames did vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He lowdly gan to laugh, and thus to jest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Alas! for pittie that so faire a crew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As like can not be scene from East to West,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cannot find one this girdle to invest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fie on the man that did it first invent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To shame us all with this Ungirt unblest I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let never Ladie to his love assent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That hath this day so many so unmanly shent.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereat all Knights gan laugh, and Ladies lowre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that at last the gentle Amoret</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Likewise assayd to prove that girdles powre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, having it about her middle set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did find it fit withouten breach or let.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat the rest gan greatly to envie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Florimell exceedingly did fret,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And snatching from her hand halfe angrily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The belt againe, about her body gan it tie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet nathemore would it her bodie fit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet nathelesse to her, as her dew right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It yielded was by them that judged it:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And she her selfe adjudged to the Knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That bore the Hebene speare, as wonne in fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Britomart would not thereto assent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne her owne Amoret forgoe so light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that strange Dame, whose beauties wonderment</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She lesse esteem’d then th’others vertuous government.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when the rest did see her to refuse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They were full glad, in hope themselves to get her:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet at her choice they all did greatly muse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, after that, the judges did arret her</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the second best that lov’d her better;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was the Salvage Knight: but he was gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In great displeasure that he could not get her.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then was she judged Triamond his one;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Triamond lov’d Canacee, and other none.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho unto Satyran she was adjudged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who was right glad to gaine so goodly meed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Blandamour thereat full greatly grudged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And litle prays’d his labours evill speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That for to winne the saddle lost the steed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne lesse thereat did Paridell complaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thought t’appeale from that which was decreed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To single combat with Sir Satyrane:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereto him Ate stird, new discord to maintaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And eke, with these, full many other Knights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She through her wicked working did incense</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her to demaund and chalenge as their rights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deserved for their perils recompense.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst the rest, with boastfull vaine pretense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stept Braggadochio forth, and as his thrall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her claym’d, by him in battell wonne long sens:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereto her selfe he did to witnesse call;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, being askt, accordingly confessed all.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereat exceeding wroth was Satyran;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wroth with Satyran was Blandamour;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wroth with Blandamour was Erivan;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at them both Sir Paridell did loure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So all together stird up strifull stoure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And readie were new battell to darraine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each one profest to be her paramoure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And vow’d with speare and shield it to maintaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne Judges powre, ne reasons rule, mote them restraine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which troublous stirre when Satyrane aviz’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan to cast how to appease the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to accord them all this meanes deviz’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First in the midst to set that fayrest Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom each one his chalenge should disclame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he himselfe his right would eke releasse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, looke to whom she voluntarie came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He should without disturbance her possesse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweete is the love that comes alone with willingnesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They all agreed: and then that snowy Mayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was in the middest plast among them all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All on her gazing wisht, and vowd, and prayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the Queene of beautie close did call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she unto their portion might befall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, when she long had lookt upon each one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As though she wished to have pleasd them all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last to Braggadochio selfe alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She came of her accord, in spight of all his fone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when they all beheld they chaft, and rag’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And woxe nigh mad for very harts despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from revenge their willes they scarce asswag’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some thought from him her to have reft by might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some proffer made with him for her to fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he nought car’d for all that they could say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he their words as wind esteemed light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet not fit place he thought it there to stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But secretly from thence that night her bore away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They which remaynd, so soone as they perceiv’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she was gone, departed thence with speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And follow’d them, in mind her to have reav’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From wight unworthie of so noble meed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which poursuit how each one did succeede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall else be told in order, as it fell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But now of Britomart it here doth neede</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hard adventures and strange haps to tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since with the rest she went not after Florimell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For soone as she them saw to discord set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her list no longer in that place abide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, taking with her lovely Amoret,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon her first adventure forth did ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke her lov’d, making blind love her guide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unluckie Mayd, to seeke her enimie!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unluckie Mayd, to seeke him farre and wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom, when he was unto her selfe most nie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She through his late disguizement could him not descrie!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So much the more her griefe, the more her toyle:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet neither toyle nor griefe she once did spare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In seeking him that should her paine assoyle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereto great comfort in her sad misfare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was Amoret, companion of her care:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who likewise sought her lover long miswent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gentle Scudamour, whose heart whileare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That stryfull hag with gealous discontent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had fild, that he to fell reveng was fully bent:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Bent to revenge on blamelesse Britomart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The crime which cursed Ate kindled earst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which like thornes did pricke his gealous hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through his soule like poysned arrow perst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That by no reason it might be reverst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ought that Glauce could or doe or say.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, aye the more that she the same reherst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The more it gauld and griev’d him night and day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That nought but dire revenge his anger mote defray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So as they travelled, the drouping night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Covered with cloudie storme and bitter showre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That dreadfull seem’d to every living wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon them fell, before her timely howre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That forced them to seeke some covert bowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where they might hide their heads in quiet rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shrowd their persons from that stormie stowre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not farre away, not meet for any guest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They spide a little cottage, like some poore mans nest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Under a steepe hilles side it placed was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There where the mouldred earth had cav’d the banke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fast beside a little brooke did pas</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of muddie water, that like puddle stanke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which few crooked sallowes grew in ranke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereto approaching nigh they heard the sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of many yron hammers beating ranke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And answering their wearie turnes around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That seemed some blacksmith dwelt in that desert ground.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There entring in, they found the goodman selfe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full busily unto his worke ybent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who was to weet a wretched wearish elfe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hollow eyes and rawbone cheekes forspent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if he had in prison long bene pent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full blacke and griesly did his face appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besmeard with smoke that nigh his eye-sight blent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With rugged beard, and hoarie shagged heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which he never wont to combe, or comely sheare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Rude was his garment, and to rags all rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne better had he, ne for better cared:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With blistred hands emongst the cinders brent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fingers filthie with long nayles unpared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right fit to rend the food on which he fared.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His name was Care; a blacksmith by his trade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That neither day nor night from working spared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to small purpose yron wedges made;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those be unquiet thoughts that carefull minds invade.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In which his worke he had sixe servants prest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About the Andvile standing evermore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With huge great hammers, that did never rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From heaping stroakes which thereon soused sore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All sixe strong groomes, but one then other more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For by degrees they all were disagreed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So likewise did the hammers which they bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like belles in greatnesse orderly succeed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he which was the last the first did farre exceede.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He like a monstrous Gyant seem’d in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Farre passing Bronteus or Pyracmon great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which in Lipari doe day and night</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Frame thunderbolts for Joves avengefull threate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So dreadfully he did the and vile beat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seem’d to dust he shortly would it drive:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So huge his hammer, and so fierce his heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seem’d a rocke of Diamond it could rive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rend asunder quite, if he thereto list strive.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sir Scudamour there entring much admired</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The manner of their worke and wearie paine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, having long beheld, at last enquired</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cause and end thereof, but all in vaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For they for nought would from their worke refraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne let his speeches come unto their eare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the breathfull bellowes blew amaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to the Northern winde, that none could heare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those Pensifenesse did move; and Sighes the bellows weare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when that warriour saw, he said no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in his armour layd him down to rest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To rest he layd him downe upon the flore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Whylome for ventrous Knights the bedding best)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thought his wearie limbs to have redrest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that old aged Dame, his faithfull Squire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her feeble joynts layd eke adowne to rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That needed much her weake age to desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After so long a travell which them both did tire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There lay Sir Scudamour long while expecting</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When gentle sleepe his heavie eyes would close;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oft chaunging sides, and oft new place electing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where better seem’d he mote himselfe repose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oft in wrath he thence againe uprose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oft in wrath he layd him downe againe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wheresoever he did himselfe dispose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He by no meanes could wished ease obtaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So every place seem’d painefull, and ech changing vaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And evermore, when he to sleepe did thinke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hammers sound his senses did molest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evermore, when he began to winke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bellowes noyse disturb’d his quiet rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne suffred sleepe to settle in his brest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the night the dogs did barke and howle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About the house, at sent of stranger guest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now the crowing Cocke, and now the Owle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lowde shriking, him afflicted to the very sowle.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, if by fortuneany litle nap</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his heavie eye-lids chaunst to fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones one of those villeins him did rap</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his headpeece with his yron mall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he was soone awaked therewithall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lightly started up as one affrayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or as if one him suddenly did call:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So oftentimes he out of sleepe abrayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then lay musing long on that him ill apayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So long he muzed, and so long he lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That at the last his wearie sprite, opprest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With fleshly weaknesse, which no creature may</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long time resist, gave place to kindly rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all his senses did full soone arrest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet in his soundest sleepe his dayly feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His ydle braine gan busily molest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made him dreame those two disloyall were:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The things, that day most minds, at night doe most appeare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that the wicked carle, the maister Smith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A paire of red-whot yron tongs did take</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the burning cinders, and therewith</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under his side him nipt; that, forst to wake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He felt his hart for very paine to quake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And started up avenged for to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On him the which his quiet slomber brake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, looking round about him, none could see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet did the smart remaine, though he himselfe did flee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In such disquiet and hart-fretting payne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He all that night, that too long night, did passe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now the day out of the Ocean mayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began to peepe above this earthly masse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With pearly dew sprinkling the morning grasse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then up he rose, like heavie lumpe of lead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in his face, as in a looking glasse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The signes of anguish one mote plainely read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ghesse the man to be dismayd with gealous dread.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Unto his lofty steede he clombe anone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And forth upon his former voiage fared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with him eke that aged Squire attone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, whatsoever perill was prepared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both equall paines and equall perill shared;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The end whereof and daungerous event</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall for another canticle be spared:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But here my wearie teeme, nigh over spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall breath it selfe awhile after so long a went.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-6" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Both Scudamour and Arthegall</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Doe fight with Britomart:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He sees her fare: doth fall in love,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And soone from her depart.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>What equall torment to the griefe of mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pyning anguish hid in gentle hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That inly feeds it selfe with thoughts unkind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And nourisheth her owne consuming smart?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What medicine can any Leaches art</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yeeld such a sore, that doth her grievance hide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And will to none her maladie impart?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such was the wound that Scudamour did gride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which Dan Phebus selfe cannot a salve provide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who having left that restlesse house of Care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The next day, as he on his way did ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of melancholic and sad misfare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through misconceipt, all unawares espide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An armed Knight under a forrest side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sitting in shade beside his grazing steede;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, soone as them approaching he descride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan towards them to pricke with eger speede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That seem’d he was full bent to some mischievous deede.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which Scudamour perceiving forth issewed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To have rencountred him in equall race;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But soone as th’other nigh approaching vewed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The armes he bore, his speare he gan abase</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And voide his course: at which so suddain case</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He wondred much. But th’other thus can say:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Ah, gentle Scudamour! unto your grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I me submit, and you of pardon pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That almost had against you trespassed this day.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whereto thus Scudamour: “Small harme it were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For any knight upon a ventrous knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without displeasance for to prove his spere.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But reade you, Sir, sith ye my name have hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What is your owne, that I mote you requite?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Certes,” (sayd he) “ye mote as now excuse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me from discovering you my name aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For time yet serves that I the same refuse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But call ye me the Salvage Knight, as others use.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Then this, Sir Salvage Knight,” (quoth he) “areede</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or doe you here within this forrest wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemeth well to answere to your weede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or have ye it for some occasion donne?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That rather seemes, sith knowen armes ye shonne.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“This other day” (sayd he) “a stranger knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shame and dishonour hath unto me donne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On whom I waite to wreake that foule despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When ever he this way shall passe by day or night.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Shame be his meede,” (quoth he) “that meaneth shame!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But what is he by whom ye shamed were?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“A stranger knight,” sayd he, “unknowne by name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But knowne by fame, and by an Hebene speare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which he all that met him downe did beare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He, in an open Turney lately held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fro me the honour of that game did reare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And having me, all wearie earst, downe feld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fayrest Ladie reft, and ever since withheld.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When Scudamour heard mention of that speare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He wist right well that it was Britomart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which from him his fairest love did beare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho gan he swell in every inner part</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For fell despight, and gnaw his gealous hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That thus he sharply sayd: “Now, by my head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet is not this the first unknightly part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which that same knight, whom by his launce I read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath doen to noble knights, that many makes him dread:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“For lately he my love hath fro me reft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke defiled with foule villanie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sacred pledge which in his faith was left,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In shame of knighthood and fidelitie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which ere long full deare he shall abie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if to that avenge by you decreed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This hand may helpe, or succour ought supplie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It shall not fayle when so ye shall it need.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So both to wreake their wrathes on Britomart agreed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whiles thus they communed, lo! farre away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Knight soft ryding towards them they spyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Attyr’d in forraine armes and straunge aray:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom, when they nigh approcht, they plaine descryde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be the same for whom they did abyde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sayd then Sir Scudamour: “Sir Salvage knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let me this crave, sith first I was defyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That first I may that wrong to him requite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, if I hap to fayle, you shall recure my right.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which being yeelded, he his threatfull speare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan fewter, and against her fiercely ran.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who soone as she him saw approching neare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With so fell rage, her selfe she lightly gan</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To dight, to welcome him well as she can;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But entertaind him in so rude a wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to the ground she smote both horse and man;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence neither greatly hasted to arise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But on their common harmes together did devise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Artegall, beholding his mischaunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">New matter added to his former fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, eft aventring his steele-headed launce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against her rode, full of despiteous ire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nought but spoyle and vengeance did require:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to himselfe his felonous intent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Returning disappointed his desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles unawares his saddle he forwent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And found himselfe on ground in great amazement.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lightly he started up out of that stound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And snatching forth his direfull deadly blade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did leape to her, as doth an eger hound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrust to an Hynd within some covert glade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom without perill he cannot invade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With such fell greedines he her assayled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That though she mounted were, yet he her made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To give him ground, (so much his force prevayled)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shun his mightie strokes, gainst which no armes avayled.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So, as they coursed here and there, it chaunst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, in her wheeling round, behind her crest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So sorely he her strooke, that thence it glaunst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adowne her backe, the which it fairely blest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From foule mischance; ne did it ever rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till on her horses hinder parts it fell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where byting deepe so deadly it imprest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That quite it chynd his backe behind the sell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to alight on foote her algates did compell:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like as the lightning brond from riven skie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throwne out by angry Jove in his vengeance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With dreadfull force falles on some steeple hie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which battring downe, it on the church doth glance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And teares it all with terrible mischance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet she no whit dismayd her steed forsooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, casting from her that enchaunted launce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto her sword and shield her soone betooke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therewithall at him right furiously she strooke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So furiously she strooke in her first heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whiles with long fight on foot he breathlesse was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she him forced backward to retreat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yeeld unto her weapon way to pas:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose raging rigour neither steele nor bras</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could stay, but to the tender flesh it went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pour’d the purple bloud forth on the gras;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all his mayle yriv’d, and plates yrent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shew’d all his bodie bare unto the cruell dent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At length, when as he saw her hastie heat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abate, and panting breath begin to fayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He, through long sufferance growing now more great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rose in his strength, and gan her fresh assayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Heaping huge strokes as thicke as showre of hayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lashing dreadfully at every part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if he thought her soule to disentrayle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah, cruell hand! and thrise more cruell hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That workst such wrecke on her to whom thou dearest art!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>What yron courage ever could endure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To worke such outrage on so faire a creature;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his madnesse thinke with hands impure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To spoyle so goodly workmanship of nature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The maker selfe resembling in her feature!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Certes some hellish furie or some feend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This mischiefe framd for their first loves defeature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bath their hands in bloud of dearest freend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereby to make their loves beginning their lives end.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus long they trac’d and traverst to and fro,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes pursewing, and sometimes pursewed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still as advantage they espyde thereto:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But toward th’end Sir Arthegall renewed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His strength still more, but she still more decrewed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last his lucklesse hand he heav’d on hie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having his forces all in one accrewed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therewith stroke at her so hideouslie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That seemed nought but death mote be her destinie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The wicked stroke upon her helmet chaunst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with the force, whiche in it selfe it bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her ventayle shard away, and thence forth glaunst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adowne in vaine, ne harm’d her any more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that her angels face, unseene afore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to the ruddie morne appeard in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deawed with silver drops through sweating sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But somewhat redder then beseem’d aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through toylesome heate and labour of her weary fight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And round about the same her yellow heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having through stirring loosd their wonted band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to a golden border did appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Framed in goldsmithes forge with cunning hand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet goldsmithes cunning could not understand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To frame such subtile wire, so shinie cleare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For it did glister like the golden sand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which Padtolus with his waters shere</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Throwes forth upon the rivage round about him nere.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And as his hand he up againe did reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thinking to worke on her his utmost wracke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His powrelesse arme, benumbd with secret feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From his revengefull purpose shronke abacke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cruell sword out of his fingers slacke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fell downe to ground; as if the steele had sence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And felt some ruth or sence his hand did lacke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or both of them did thinke obedience</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To doe to so divine a beauties excellence.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And he himselfe, long gazing thereupon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last fell humbly downe upon his knee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of his wonder made religion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weening some heavenly goddesse he did see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or else unweeting what it else might bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pardon her besought his errour frayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That had done outrage in so high degree:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilest trembling horrour did his sense assayle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made ech member quake, and manly hart to quayle.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nathelesse she, full of wrath for that late stroke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All that long while upheld her wrathfull hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With fell intent on him to bene y wroke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, looking sterne, still over him did stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Threatning to strike unlesse he would withstand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bad him rise, or surely he should die.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, die or live, for nought he would upstand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But her of pardon prayd more earnestlie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or wreake on him her will for so great injurie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when as Scudamour, who now abrayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beheld, whereas he stood not farre aside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He was therewith right wondrously dismayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And drawing nigh, when as he plaine descride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That peerelesse paterne of Dame Natures pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heavenly image of perfection,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He blest himselfe as one sore terrifide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, turning feare to faint devotion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did worship her as some celestiall vision.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Glauce, seeing all that chaunced there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well weeting how their errour to assoyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full glad of so good end, to them drew nere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her salewd with seemely bel-accoyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Joyous to see her safe after long toyle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then her besought, as she to her was deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To graunt unto those warriours truce a whyle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which yeelded, they their bevers up did reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shew’d themselves to her such as indeed they were.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When Britomart with sharpe avizefull eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beheld the lovely face of Artegall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tempred with sternesse and stout majestic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She gan eftsoones it to her mind to call</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be the same which in her fathers hall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long since in that enchaunted glasse she saw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith her wrathfull courage gan appall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And haughtie spirits meekely to adaw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That her enhaunced hand she downe Can soft withdraw.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet she it forst to have againe upheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As fayning choler which was turn’d to cold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But ever when his visage she beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her hand fell downe, and would no longer hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wrathfull weapon gainst his countnance bold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when in vaine to fight she oft assayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She arm’d her tongue, and thought at him to scold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nathlesse her tongue not to her will obayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But brought forth speeches myld when she would have missayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Scudamour, now woxen inly glad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all his gealous feare he false had found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And how that Hag his love abused had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With breach of faith and loyaltie unsound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which long time his grieved hart did wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him thus bespake: “Certes, Sir Artegall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I joy to see you lout so low on ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now become to live a Ladies thrall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That whylome in your minde wont to despise them all.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as she heard the name of Artegall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her hart did leape, and all her hart-strings tremble,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For sudden joy and secret feare withall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all her vitall powres, with motion nimble</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To succour it, themselves gan there assemble;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That by the swift recourse of flushing blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right plaine appeard, though she it would dissemble,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fayned still her former angry mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thinking to hide the depth by troubling of the flood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When Glauce thus gan wisely all upknit:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Ye gentle Knights, whom fortune here hath brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be spectators of this uncouth fit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which secret fate hath in this Ladie wrought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the course of kind, ne mervaile nought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne thenceforth feare the thing that hethertoo</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath troubled both your mindes with idle thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fearing least she your loves away should woo:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feared in vaine, sith meanes, ye see, there wants theretoo.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And you, Sir Artegall, the salvage knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Henceforth may not disdaine that womans hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath conquered you anew in second fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For whylome they have conquerd sea and land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heaven it selfe, that nought may them withstand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne henceforth be rebellious unto love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is the crowne of knighthood, and the band</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of noble minds derived from above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, being knit with vertue, never will remove.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And you, faire Ladie knight, my dearest Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Relent the rigour of your wrathfull will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose fire were better turn’d to other flame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, wiping out remembrance of all ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Graunt him your grace; but so that he fulfill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The penance which ye shall to him empart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For lovers heaven must passe by sorrowes hell.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereat full inly blushed Britomart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Artegall close smyling joy’d in secret hart.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet durst he not make love so suddenly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne thinke th’affection of her hart to draw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From one to other so quite contrary:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besides her modest countenance he saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So goodly grave, and full of princely aw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it his ranging fancie did refraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And looser thoughts to lawfull bounds withdraw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereby the passion grew more fierce and faine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like to a stubborne steede whom strong hand would restraine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Scudamour, whose hart twixt doubtfull feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And feeble hope hung all this while suspence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Desiring of his Amoret to heare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some gladfull newes and sure intelligence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her thus bespake: “But, Sir, without offence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mote I request you tydings of my love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Amoret, sith you her freed fro thence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where she, captived long, great woes did prove;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That where ye left I may her seeke, as doth behove.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom thus Britomart: “Certes, Sir knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What is of her become, or whether reft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I can not unto you aread a right:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For from that time I from enchaunters theft</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her freed, in which ye her all hopelesse left,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I her preserv’d from perill and from feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evermore from villenie her kept:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever was there wight to me more deare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then she, ne unto whom I more true love did beare:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Till on a day, as through a desert wyld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We travelled, both wearie of the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We did alight, and sate in shadow myld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where fearelesse I to sleepe me downe did lay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when as I did out of sleepe abray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I found her not where I her left whyleare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But thought she wandred was, or gone astray:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I cal’d her loud, I sought her farre and neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But no where could her find, nor tydings of her heare.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When Scudamour those heavie tydings heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His hart was thrild with point of deadly feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne in his face or bloud or life appeard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But senselesse stood, like to a mazed steare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That yet of mortall stroke the stound doth beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till Glauce thus: “Faire Sir, be nought dismayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With needlesse dread, till certaintie ye heare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For yet she may be safe though somewhat strayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its best to hope the best, though of the worst affrayd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nathlesse he hardly of her chearefull speech</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did comfort take, or in his troubled sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shew’d change of better cheare: so sore a breach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sudden newes had made into his spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till Britomart him fairely thus behight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Great cause of sorrow certes, Sir, ye have;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But comfort take; for, by this heavens light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I vow you dead or living not to leave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till I her find, and wreake on him that did her reave.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith he rested, and well pleased was:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Peace being confirm’d amongst them all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They tooke their steeds, and forward thence did pas</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto some resting place, which mote befall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All being guided by Sir Artegall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where goodly solace was unto them made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dayly feasting both in bowre and hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untill that they their wounds well healed had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wearie limmes recur’ d after late usage bad.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In all which time Sir Artegall made way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the love of noble Britomart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with meeke service and much suit did lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Continuall siege unto her gentle hart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, being whylome launcht with lovely dart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More eath was new impression to receive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How ever she her paynd with womanish art</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hide her wound, that none might it perceive:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vaine is the art that seekes it selfe for to deceive.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So well he woo’d her, and so well he wrought her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With faire entreatie and sweet blandishment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That at the length unto a bay he brought her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So as she to his speeches was content</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To lend an eare, and softly to relent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last, through many vowes which forth he pour’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many othes, she yeelded her consent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be his love, and take him for her Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till they with mariage meet might finish that accord.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho, when they had long time there taken rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir Artegall, who all this while was bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon an hard adventure yet in quest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fit time for him thence to depart it found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To follow that which he did long propound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto her his congee came to take;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But her therewith full sore displeasd he found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And loth to leave her late betrothed make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her dearest love full loth so shortly to forsake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet he with strong perswasions her asswaged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wonne her will to suffer him depart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which his faith with her he fast engaged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thousand vowes from bottome of his hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, all so soone as he by wit or art</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could that atchieve whereto he did aspire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He unto her would speedily revert:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No longer space thereto he did desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But till the horned moone three courses did expire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With which she for the present was appeased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yeelded leave, how ever malcontent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She inly were and in her mind displeased.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So, early in the morrow next, he went</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth on his way to which he was ybent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne wight him to attend, or way to guide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As whylome was the custome ancient</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst Knights when on adventures they did ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save that she algates him a while accompanide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And by the way she sundry purpose found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of this or that, the time for to delay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of the perils whereto he was bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The feare whereof seem’d much her to affray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all she did was but to weare out day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full oftentimes she leave of him did take;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eft againe deviz’d some what to say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which she forgot, whereby excuse to make;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So loth she was his companie for to forsake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last, when all her speeches she had spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And new occasion fayld her more to find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She left him to his fortunes government,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And backe returned with right heavie mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Scudamour, whom she had left behind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With whom she went to seeke faire Amoret,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her second care, though in another kind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For vertues onely sake, which doth beget</span>
					<br/>
					<span>True love and faithfull friendship, she by her did set.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Backe to that desert forrest they retyred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where sorie Britomart had lost her late;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There they her sought, and every where inquired</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where they might tydings get of her estate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet found they none. But by what haplesse fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or hard misfortune she was thence convayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stolne away from her beloved mate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were long to tell; therefore, I here will stay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Untill another tyde that I it finish may.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-7" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Amoret rapt by greedie Lust</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Belphebe saves from death:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Squire her loves; and being blam’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">His daies in dole doth lead.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Great God of love, that with thy cruell darts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doest conquer greatest conquerors on ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And setst thy kingdome in the captive harts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Kings and Keasars to thy service bound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What glorie, or what guerdon hast thou found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In feeble Ladies tyranning so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And adding anguish to the bitter wound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which their lives thou lanchedst long afore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By heaping stormes of trouble on them daily more?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So whylome didst thou to faire Florimell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so and so to noble Britomart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So doest thou now to her of whom I tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The lovely Amoret, whose gentle hart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou martyrest with sorow and with smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In salvage forrests and in deserts wide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Beares and Tygers taking heavie part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withouten comfort and withouten guide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That pittie is to heare the perils which she tride.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So soooc as die with that brave Britonesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had left that Turneyment for beauties prise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They travel’d long; that now for weannesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both of the way and warlike exercise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both through a forest ryding did devise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T’alight, and rest their wearie limbs awhile.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There heavie sleepe the eye-lids did surprise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Britomart, after long tedious toyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That did her passed paines in quiet rest assoyle.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The whiles faire Amoret, of nought affeard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Walkt through die wood, for pleasure or for need;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When suddenly behind her backe she heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One rushing forth out of the thickest weed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, ere she backe could turne to taken heed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had unawares her snatched up from ground:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Feebly she shriekt, but so feebly indeed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Britomart heard not the shrilling sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There where through weary travel she lay sleeping sound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It was to weet a wilde and salvage man;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was no man, but onely like in shape,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke in stature higher by a span;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All overgrowne with haire, that could awhape</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An hardy hart; and his wide, mouth did gape</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With huge great teeth, like to a tusked Bore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he liv’d all on ravin and on rape</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of men and beasts; and fed on fleshly gore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The signe whereof yet stain’d his bloudy lips afore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His neather lip was not like man nor beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But like a wide deepe poke, downe hanging low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which he wont the relickes of his feast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cruell spoyle, which he had spard, to stow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And over it his huge great nose did grow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full dreadfully empurpled all with bloud;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And downe both sides two wide long eares did glow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And raught downe to his waste when up he stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More great then th’eares of Elephants by Indus flood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His wast was with a wreath of yvie greene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Engirt about, ne other garment wore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all his haire was like a garment scene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his hand a tall young oake he bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose knottie snags were sharpned all afore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And beath’d in fire for steele to be in sted.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But whence he was, or of what wombe ybore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of beasts, or of the earth, I have not red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But certes was with milke of Wolves and Tygres fed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This ugly creature in his armes her snatcht,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through the forrest bore her quite away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With briers and bushes all to-rent and scratcht;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne care he had, ne pittie of the pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which many a knight had sought so many a day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He stayed not, but in his armes her bearing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ran, till he came to th’end of all his way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto his cave farre from all peoples hearing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there he threw her in, nought feeling, ne nought fearing.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For she, deare Ladie, all the way was dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilest he in armes her bore; but, when she felt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her selfe downe soust, she waked out of dread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Streight into griefe, that her deare hart nigh swelt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eft gan into tender teares to melt.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, when she lookt about, and nothing found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But darknesse and dread horrour where she dwelt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She almost fell againe into a swound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne wist whether above she were or under ground.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that she heard some one close by her side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sighing and sobbing sore, as if the paine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her tender hart in peeces would divide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which she long listning, softly askt againe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What mister wight it was that so did plaine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom thus aunswer’d was: “Ah, wretched wight!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seekes to know anothers griefe in vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unweeting of thine owne like haplesse plight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Selfe to forget to mind another is over-sight.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Aye me!” (said she) “where am I, or with whom?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emong the living, or emong the dead?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What shall of me, unhappy maid, become?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall death be th’end, or ought else worse, aread?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Unhappy mayd” (then answer’d she) “whose dread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untride is lesse then when thou shalt it try:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Death is to him, that wretched life doth lead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both grace and gaine; but he in hell doth lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That lives a loathed life, and wishing cannot die.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“This dismall day hath thee a captive made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And vassall to the vilest wretch alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose cursed usage and ungodly trade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The heavens abhorre, and into darkenesse drive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For on the spoile of women he doth live,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose bodies chast, when ever in his powre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He may them catch unable to gainestrive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He with his shamefull lust doth first deflowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And afterwardes themselves doth cruelly devoure.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Now twenty daies, by which the sonnes of men</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Divide their works, have past through heven sheene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since I was brought into this dolefull den;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">During which space these sory eies have seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seaven women by him slaine, and eaten clene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now no more for him but I alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And this old woman, here remaining beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till thou cam’st hither to augment our mone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of us three to morrow he will sure eate one.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ah, dreadfull tidings which thou doest declare,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Quoth she) “of all that ever hath bene knowen!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full many great calamities and rare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This feeble brest endured hath, but none</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Equall to this, where ever I have gone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But what are you, whom like unlucky lot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath linckt with me in the same chaine attone?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“To tell” (quoth she) “that what ye see, needs not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wofull wretched maid, of God and man forgot!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But what I was it irkes me to reherse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Daughter unto a Lord of high degree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That joyd in happy peace, till fates perverse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With guilefull love did secretly agree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To overthrow my state and dignitie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It was my lot to love a gentle swaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was he but a Squire of low degree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was he meet, unless mine eye did faine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By any Ladies side for Leman to have laine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But for his meannesse and disparagement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Sire, who me too dearely well did love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto my choise by no meanes would assent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But often did my folly fowle reprove:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet nothing could my fixed mind remove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, whether willed or nilled friend or foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I me resolv’d the utmost end to prove;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, rather then my love abandon so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both sire and friends and all for ever to forgo.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thenceforth I sought by secret meanes to worke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Time to my will, and from his wrathfull sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hide th’intent which in my heart did lurke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till I thereto had all things ready dight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So on a day, unweeting unto wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I with that Squire agreede away to flit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in a privy place, betwixt us hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within a grove appointed him to meete;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To which I boldly came upon my feeble feete.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But ah! unhappy houre me thither brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For in that place where I him thought to find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There was I found, contrary to my thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of this accursed Carle of hellish kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The shame of men, and plague of womankind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who trussing me, as Eagle doth his pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me hether brought with him as swift as wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where yet untouched till this present day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I rest his wretched thrall, the sad Aemylia.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ah, sad Aemylia!” (then sayd Amoret)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Thy ruefull plight I pitty as mine owne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But read to me, by what devise or wit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hast thou in all this time, from him unknowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thine honor sav’d, though into thraldome throwne?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Through helpe” (quoth she) “of this old woman here</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I have so done, as she to me hath showne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, ever when he burnt in lustfull fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She in my stead supplide his bestiall desire.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus of their evils as they did discourse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And each did other much bewaile and mone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Loe! where the villaine selfe, their sorrowes sourse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came to the cave; and rolling thence the stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which wont to stop the mouth thereof, that none</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might issue forth, came rudely rushing in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, spredding over all the flore alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan dight him selfe unto his wonted sinne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which ended, then his bloudy banket should beginne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when as fearefull Amoret perceived,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She staid not th’utmost end thereof to try,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, like a ghastly Gelt whose wits are reaved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ran forth in hast with hideous outcry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For horrour of his shamefull villany:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But after her full lightly he uprose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her pursu’d as fast as she did flie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full fast she flies, and farre afore him goes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne feeles the thornes and thickets pricke her tender toes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nor hedge, nor ditch, nor hill, nor dale she staies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But overleapes them all, like Robucke light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through the thickest makes her nighest waies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evermore, when with regardfull sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She looking backe espies that griesly wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Approching nigh, she gins to mend her pace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And makes her feare a spur to hast her flight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More swift then Myrrh’ or Daphne in her race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or any of the Thracian Nimphes in salvage chase.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Long so she fled, and so he follow’d long;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne living aide for her on earth appeares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But-if the heavens helpe to redresse her wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Moved with pity of her plenteous teares.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It fortuned Belphebe with her peares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The woody Nimphs, and with that lovely boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was hunting then the Libbards and the Beares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In these wild woods, as was her wonted joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To banish sloth that oft doth noble mindes annoy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It so befell, as oft it fals in chace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That each of them from other sundred were;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that same gentle bquire arnv d in place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where this same cursed caytive did appeare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pursuing that faire Lady full of feare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now he her quite overtaken had;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now he her away with him did beare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under his arme, as seeming wondrous glad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That by his grenning laughter mote farre off be rad.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which drery sight the gentle Squire espying</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth hast to crosse him by the nearest way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Led with that wofull Ladies piteous crying,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him assailes with all the might he may;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet will not he the lovely spoile downe lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with his craggy club in his right hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Defends him selfe, and saves his gotten pray:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet had it bene right hard him to withstand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that he was full light and nimble on the land.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereto the villaine used craft in fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, ever when the Squire his javelin shooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He held the Lady forth before him right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with her body, as a buckler, broke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The puissance of his intended stroke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if it chaunst, (as needs it must in fight)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilest he on him was greedy to be wroke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That any little blow on her did light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then would he laugh aloud, and gather great delight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which subtill sleight did him encumber much,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made him oft, when he would strike, forbeare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For hardly could he come the carle to touch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that he her must hurt, or hazard neare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet he his hand so carefully did beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That at the last he did himselfe attaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therein left the pike-head of his speare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A streame of coleblacke bloud thence gusht amaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all her silken garments did with bloud bestaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With that he threw her rudely on the flore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, laying both his hands upon his glave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With dreadfull strokes let drive at him so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That forst him flie abacke, himselfe to save:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet he therewith so felly still did rave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That scarse the Squire his hand could once upreare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But for advantage ground unto him gave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tracing and traversing, now here, now there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For bootlesse thing it was to think such blowes to beare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whilest thus in battell they embusied were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Belphebe, raunging in that forrest wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hideous noise of their huge strokes did heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And drew thereto, making her eare her guide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when that theefe approching nigh espide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With bow in hand and arrowes ready bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He by his former combate would not bide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But fled away with ghastly dreriment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well knowing her to be his deaths sole instrument.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom seeing flie she speedily poursewed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With winged feete as nimble as the winde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever in her bow she ready shewed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The arrow to his deadly marke desynde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As when Latonaes daughter, cruell kynde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In vengement of her mothers great disgrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With fell despight her cruell arrowes tynde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst wofull Niobes unhappy race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all the gods did mone her miserable case.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So well she sped her, and so far she ventred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, ere unto his hellish den he raught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as he ready was there to have entred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She sent an arrow forth with mighty draught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in the very dore him overcaught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, in his nape arriving, through it thrild</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His greedy throte, therewith in two distraught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all his vitall spirites thereby spild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all his hairy brest with gory bloud was fild.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when on ground she groveling saw to rowle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She ran in hast his life to have bereft;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, ere she could him reach, the sinfull sowle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having his carrion corse quite sencelesse left</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was fled to hell, surcharg’d with spoile and theft:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet over him she there long gazing stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oft admir’d his monstrous shape, and oft</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mighty limbs, whilest all with filthy bloud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The place there overflowne seemd like a sodaine flood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thence forth she past into his dreadfull den,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where nought but darkesome drerinesse she found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne creature saw, but hearkned now and then</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some litle whispering, and soft groning sound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that she askt, what ghosts there under ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lay hid in horrour of eternall night?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bad them, if so be they were not bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To come and shew themselves before the light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now freed from feare and danger of that dismall wight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then forth the sad Aemylia issewed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet trembling every joynt through former feare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after her the Hag, there with her mewed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A foule and lothsome creature, did appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A leman fit for such a lover deare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That mov’d Belphebe her no lesse to hate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then for to rue the others heavy cheare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whom she gan enquire of her estate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who all to her at large, as hapned, did relate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thence she them brought toward the place where late</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She left the gentle Squire with Amoret:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There she him found by that new lovely mate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who lay the whiles in swoune, full sadly set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From her faire eyes wiping the deawy wet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which softly stild, and kissing them atweene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And handling soft the hurts which she did get;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For of that Carle she sorely bruz’d had beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Als of his owne rash hand one wound was to be scene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when she saw with sodaine glauncing eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her noble heart with sight thereof was fild</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With deepe disdaine and great indignity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in her wrath she thought them both have thrild</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that selfe arrow which the Carle had kild;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet held her wrathfull hand from vengeance sore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But drawing nigh, ere he her well beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Is this the faith?” she said and said no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But turnd her face, and fled away for evermore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He seeing her depart arose up light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right sore agrieved at her sharpe reproofe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And follow’d fast; but, when he came in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He durst not nigh approch, but kept aloofe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For dread of her displeasures utmost proofe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evermore, when he did grace entreat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And framed speaches fit for his behoofe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her mortall arrowes she at him did threat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And forst him backe with fowle dishonor to retreat.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last, when long he follow’d had in vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet found no ease of griefe nor hope of grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto those woods he turned backe againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of sad anguish and in heavy case:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, finding there fit solitary place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For wofull wight, chose out a gloomy glade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where hardly eye mote see bright heavens face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For mossy trees, which covered all with shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sad melancholy: there he his cabin made.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His wonted warlike weapons all he broke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And threw away, with vow to use no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne thenceforth ever strike in battell stroke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever word to speake to woman more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in that wildernesse, of men forlore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of the wicked world forgotten quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His hardjmishap in dolor to deplore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wast his wretched daies in wofull plight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So on him selfe to wreake his follies owne despight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And eke his garment, to be thereto meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He wilfully did cut and shape anew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his faire lockes, that wont with ointment sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be embaulm’d, and sweat out dainty dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He let to grow and griesly to concrew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uncomb’d, uncurl’d, and carelesly unshed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in short time his face they overgrew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And over all his shoulders did dispred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That who he whilome was uneath was to be red.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There he continued in this carefull plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wretchedly “wearing out his youthly yeares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through wilfull penury consumed quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That like a pined ghost he soone appeares:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For other food then that wilde forrest beares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne other drinke there did he ever tast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then running water tempred with his teares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The more his weakened body so to wast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That out of all: mens knowledge he was worne at last.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For on a day, by fortune as it fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His owne deare Lord Prince Arthure came that way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeking adventures where he mote heare tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, as he through the wandring wood did stray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having espide this Cabin far away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He to it drew, to weet who there did wonne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weening therein some holy Hermit lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That did resort of sinfull people shonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or else some woodman shrowded there from scorching sunne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Arriving there he found this wretched man</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spending his daies in dolour and despaire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through long fasting woxen pale and wan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All overgrowen with rude and rugged haire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That albeit his owne dear Squire he were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet he him knew not, ne aviz’d at all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But like strange wight, whom he had scene no where,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saluting him gan into speach to fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pitty much his plight, that liv’d like outcast thrall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But to his speach he aunswered no whit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But stood still mute, as if he had beene dum,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne signe of sence did shew, ne common wit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one with griefe and anguishe overcum,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto every thing did aunswere mum:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever, when the Prince unto him spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He louted lowly, as did him becum,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And humble homage did unto him make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Midst sorrow shewing joyous semblance for his sake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At which his uncouth guise and usage quaint</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Prince did wonder much, yet could not ghesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cause of that his sorrowfull constraint;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet weend, by secret signes of manlinesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which close appeard in that rude brutishnesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he whilome some gentle swaine had beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Traind up in feats of armes and knightlinesse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he observ’d, by that he him had scene</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To weld his naked sword, and try the edges keene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And eke by that he saw on every tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How he the name of one engraven had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which likly was his liefest love to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From whom he now so sorely was bestad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which was by him <b>Belphebe</b> rightly rad.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet who was that Belphebe he ne wist;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet saw he often how he wexed glad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When he it heard, and how the ground he kist</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein it written was, and how himselfe he blist.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho, when he long had marked his demeanor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saw that all he said and did was vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought mote make him change his wonted tenor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought mote ease or mitigate his paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He left him there in langour to remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till time for him should remedy provide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him restore to former grace againe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, for it is too long here to abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will deferre the end untill another tide.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-8" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The gentle Squire recovers grace:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Sclaunder her guests doth staine:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Corflambo chaceth Placidas,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And is by Arthur slaine.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Well said the Wiseman, now prov’d true by this</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to this gentle Squire did happen late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the displeasure of the mighty is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then death it selfe more dread and desperate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For naught the same may calme ne mitigate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till time the tempest doe thereof delay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sufferaunce soft, which rigour can abate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And have the sterne remembrance wypt away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of bitter thoughts, which deepe therein infixed lay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like as it fell to this unhappy boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose tender heart the faire Belphebe had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With one sterne looke so daunted, that no joy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In all his life, which afterwards he lad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He ever tasted; but with penaunce sad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pensive sorrow pind and wore away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever laught, ne once shew’d countenance glad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But alwaies wept and wailed night and day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As blasted bloosme through heat doth languish and decay</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Till on a day, as in his wonted wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His doole he made, there chaunst a turtle Dove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To come where he his dolors did devise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That likewise late had lost her dearest love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which losse her made like passion also prove:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, seeing his sad plight, her tender heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With deare compassion deeply did emmove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she gan mone his undeserved smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with her dolefull accent beare with him a part.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Shee sitting by him, as on ground he lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her mournefull notes full piteously did frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thereof made a lamentable lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So sensibly compyld, that in the same</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him seemed oft he heard his owne right name.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that he forth would poure so plenteous teares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And beat his breast unworthy of such blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And knocke his head, and rend his rugged heares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That could have perst the hearts of Tigres and of Beares.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus, long this gentle bird to him did use</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withouten dread of perill to repaire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto his wonne, and with her mournefull muse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him to recomfort in his greatest care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That much did ease his mourning and misfare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every day, for guerdon of her song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He part of his small feast to her would share;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, at the last, of all his woe and wrong</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Companion she became, and so continued long.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Upon a day as she him sate beside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By chance he certaine miniments forth drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which yet with him as relickes did abide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the bounty which Belphebe threw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On him, whilst goodly grace she him did shew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst the rest a Jewell rich he found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was a Ruby of right perfect hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shap’d like a heart yet bleeding of the wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with a litle golden chaine about it bound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The same he tooke, and with a riband new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which his Ladies colours were, did bind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About the turtles necke, that with the vew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did greatly solace his engrieved mind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All unawares the bird, when she did find</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her selfe so deckt, her nimble wings displaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And flew away as lightly as the wind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which sodaine accident him much dismaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And looking after long did mark which way she straid.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when as long he looked had in vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet saw her forward still to make her flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His weary eie returnd to him againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of discomfort and disquiet plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That both his juell he had lost so light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke his deare companion of his care.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that sweet bird departing flew forthright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through the wide region of the wastfull aire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Untill she came where wonned his Belphebe faire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There found she her (as then it did betide)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sitting in covert shade of arbors sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After late wearie toile which she had tride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In salvage chase, to rest as seem’d her meet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There she alighting fell before her feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gan to her her mournfull plaint to make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As was her wont, thinking to let her weet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The great tormenting griefe that for her sake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her gentle Squire through her displeasure did pertake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She, her beholding with attentive eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At length did marke about her purple brest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That precious juell, which she formerly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had knowne right well, with colourd ribbands drest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith she rose in hast, and her addrest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With ready hand it to have reft away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the swift bird obayd not her behest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But swarv’d aside, and there againe did stay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She follow’d her, and thought againe it to assay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And ever, when she nigh approcht, the Dove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would flit a litle forward, and then stay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till she drew neare, and then againe remove;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So tempting her still to pursue the pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And still from her escaping soft away:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that at length into that forrest wide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She drew her far, and led with slow delay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In th’end she her unto that place did guide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereas that wofull man in langour did abide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones she flew unto his fearelesse hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there a piteous ditty new deviz’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if she would have made her understand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His sorrowes cause, to be of her despis’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when she saw in wretched weedes disguiz’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With heary glib deform’d and meiger face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like ghost late risen from his grave agryz’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She knew him not, but pittied much his case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wisht it were in her to doe him any grace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He her beholding at her feet downe fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And kist the ground on which her sole did tread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And washt the same with water which did well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From his moist eies, and like two streames procead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet spake no word, whereby she might aread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What mister wight he was, or what he ment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, as one daunted with her presence dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Onely few ruefull lookes unto her sent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As messengers of his true meaning and intent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet nathemore his meaning she ared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wondred much at his so selcouth case;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by his persons secret seemlyhed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well weend that he had beene some man of place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before misfortune did his hew deface;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That being mov’d with ruth she thus bespake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Ah! wofull man, what heavens hard disgrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or wrath of cruell wight on thee ywrake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or selfe-disliked life, doth thee thus wretched make?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“If heaven, then none may it redresse or blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith to his powre we all are subject borne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If wrathfull wight, then fowle rebuke and shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be theirs that have so cruell thee forlorne!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if through inward griefe or wilfull scorne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of life it be, then better doe advise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he, whose daies in wilfull woe are worne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The grace of his Creator doth despise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That will not use his gifts for thanklesse nigardise.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When so he heard her say, eftsoones he brake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His sodaine silence which he long had pent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, sighing inly deepe, her thus bespake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Then have they all themselves against me bent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For heaven, first author of my languish men t,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Envying my too great felicity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did closely with a cruell one consent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To cloud my daies in dolefull misery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make me loath this life, still longing for to die.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ne any but your selfe, O dearest dred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath done this wrong, to wreake on worthlesse wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your high displesure, through misdeeming bred:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, when your pleasure is to deeme aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye may redresse, and me restore to light!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which sory words her mightie hart did mate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With mild regard to see his ruefull plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her inhuming wrath she gan abate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And him receiv’d againe to former favours state.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In which he long time afterwards did lead</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An happie life with grace and good accord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fearlesse of fortunes chaunge or envies dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke all mindlesse of his owne deare Lord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The noble Prince, who never heard one word</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of ty dings what did unto him betide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or what good fortune did to him afford;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But through the endlesse world did wander wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him seeking evermore, yet no where him descride.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Till on a day, as through that wood he rode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He chaunst to come where those two Ladies late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Aemylia and Amoret, abode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both in full sad and sorrowfull estate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The one right feeble through the evill rate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of food which in her duresse she had found;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other almost dead and desperate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through her late hurts, and through that haplesse wound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With which the Squire, in her defence, her sore astound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when the Prince beheld, he gan to rew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The evill case in which those Ladies lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But most was moved at the piteous vew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Amoret, so neare unto decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her great daunger did him much dismay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones that pretious liqueur forth he drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he in store about him kept alway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with few drops thereof did softly dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her wounds, that unto strength restor’d her soone anew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho, when they both recovered were right well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan of them inquire, what evill guide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them thether brought, and how their harmes befell?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom they told all that did them betide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And how from thraldome vile they were untide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that same wicked Carle, by Virgins bond;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose bloudie corse they shew’d him there beside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke his cave in which they both were bond:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At which he wondred much when all those signes he fond.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And evermore he greatly did desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To know what Virgin did them thence unbind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oft of them did earnestly inquire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where was her won, and how he mote her find.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, when as nought according to his mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He could out-learne, he them from ground did reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No service lothsome to a gentle kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on his warlike beast them both did beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Himselfe by them on foot to succour them from feare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So when that forrest they had passed well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A litle cotage farre away they spide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which they drew ere night upon them fell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And entring in found none therein abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But one old woman sitting there beside</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the ground in ragged rude attyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With filthy lockes about her scattered wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gnawing her nayles for felnesse and for yre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there out sucking venime to her parts entyre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A foule and loathly creature sure in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in conditions to be loath’d no lesse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she was stuft with rancour and despight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Up to the throat, that oft with bitternesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It forth would breake, and gush in great excesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pouring out streames of poyson and of gall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst all that truth or vertue doe professe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom she with leasings lewdly did miscall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wickedly backbite: Her name men Sclaunder call.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her nature is all goodnesse to abuse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And causelesse crimes continually to frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which she guiltlesse persons may accuse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And steale away the crowne of their good name:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever Knight so bold, ne ever Dame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So chast and loyall liv’d, but she would strive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With forged cause them falsely to defame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever thing so well was doen alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But she with blame would blot, and of due praise deprive.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her words were not, as common words are ment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T’expresse the meaning of the inward mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But noysome breath, and poysnous spirit sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From inward parts, with cancred malice lind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And breathed forth with blast of bitter wind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which passing through the eares would pierce the hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wound the soule it selfe with griefe unkind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, like the stings of aspes that kill with smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her spightfull words did pricke and wound the inner part.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such was that Hag, unmeet to host such guests,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom greatest Princes court would welcome fayne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But neede, that answers not to all requests,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bad them not looke for better entertayne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke that age despysed nicenesse vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enur’d to hardnesse and to homely fare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which them to warlike discipline did trayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And manly limbs endur’d with litle care</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against all hard mishaps and fortunelesse misfare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then all that evening (welcommed with cold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chearelesse hunger) they together spent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet found no fault, but that the Hag did scold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rayle at them with grudgefull discontent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For lodging there without her owne consent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet they endured all with patience milde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto rest themselves all onely lent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Regardlesse of that queane so base and vilde</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be unjustly blamd, and bitterly revilde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Here, well I weene, when as these rimes be red</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With misregard, that some rash-witted wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose looser thought will lightly be misled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These gentle Ladies will misdeeme too light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thus conversing with this noble Knight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith now of dayes such temperance is rare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hard to finde, that heat of youthfull spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ought will from his greedie pleasure spare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More hard for hungry steed t’abstaine from pleasant lare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But antique age, yet in the infancie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of time, did live then like an innocent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In simple truth and blamelesse chastitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne then of guile had made experiment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, void of vile and treacherous intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Held vertue for it selfe in soveraine awe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then loyall love had royall regiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And each unto his lust did make a lawe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From all forbidden things his liking to withdraw.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Lyon there did with the Lambe consort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the Dove sate by the Faulcons side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne each of other feared fraud or tort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But did in safe securitie abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withouten perill of the stronger pride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when the world woxe old, it woxe warre old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Whereof it hight) and, having shortly tride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The traines of wit, in wickednesse woxe bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dared of all sinnes the secrets to unfold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then beautie, which was made to represent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The great Creatours owne resemblance bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto abuse of lawlesse lust was lent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made the baite of bestiall delight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then faire grew foule, and foule grew faire in sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that, which wont to vanquish God and man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was made the vassall of the victors might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then did her glorious flowre wax dead and wan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Despisd and troden downe of all that over-ran.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now it is so utterly decayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That any bud thereof doth scarse remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But-if few plants, preserv’d through heavenly ayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Princes Court doe hap to sprout againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dew’d with her drops of bountie Soveraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which from that goodly glorious flowre proceed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sprung of the auncient stocke of Princes straine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now th’onely remnant of that royall breed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose noble kind at first was sure of heavenly seed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tho, soone as day discovered heavens face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sinfull men with darknes overdight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This gentle crew gan from their eye-lids chace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The drowzie humour of the dampish night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did themselves unto their journey dight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So forth they yode, and forward softly paced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That them to view had bene an uncouth sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How all the way the Prince on footpace traced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Ladies both on horse, together fast embraced.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soone as they thence departed were afore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shamefull Hag, the slaunder of her sexe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them follow’d fast, and them reviled sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him calling theefe, them whores; that much did vexe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His noble hart: thereto she did annexe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">False crimes and facts, such as they never ment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That those two Ladies much asham’d did wexe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The more did she pursue her lewd intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rayl’d and rag’d, till she had all her poyson spent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last, when they were passed out of sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet she did not her spightfull speach forbeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But after them did barke, and still backbite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though there were none her hatefull words to heare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as a curre doth felly bite and teare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The stone which passed straunger at him threw:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So she, them seeing past the reach of eare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the stones and trees did rayle anew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till she had duld the sting which in her tongs end grew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They passing forth kept on their readie way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With easie steps so soft as foot could stryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both for great feeblesse, which did oft assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Amoret that scarcely she could ryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke through heavie armes which sore annoyd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Prince on foot, not wonted so to fare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose steadie hand was faine his steede to guyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the way from trotting hard to spare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So was his toyle the more, the more that was his care.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At length they spide where towards them with speed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Squire came gallopping, as he would flie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bearing a litle Dwarfe before his steed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the way full loud for aide did crie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seem’d his shrikes would rend the brasen skie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom after did a mightie man pursew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ryding upon a Dromedare on hie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of stature huge, and horrible of hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That would have maz’d a man his dreadfull face to vew</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For from his fearefull eyes two fierie beames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More sharpe then points of needles, did proceede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shooting forth farre away two flaming streames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of sad powre, that poysnous bale did breede</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To all that on him lookt without good heed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And secretly his enemies did slay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as the Basiliske, of serpents seede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From powrefull eyes close venim doth convay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the lookers hart, and killeth farre away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He all the way did rage at that same Squire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after him full many threatnings threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With curses vaine in his avengefull ire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But none of them (so fast away he flew)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him overtooke before he came in vew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where when he saw the Prince in armour bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He cald to him aloud his case to rew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rescue him, through succour of his might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From that his cruell foe that him pursewd in sight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones the Prince tooke downe those Ladies twaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From loftie steede, and mounting in their stead</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came to that Squire, yet trembling every vaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whom he gan enquire his cause of dread:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who as he gan the same to him aread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Loe! hard behind his backe his foe was prest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With dreadfull weapon aymed at his head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That unto death had doen him unredrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had not the noble Prince his readie stroke represt:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who, thrusting boldly twixt him and the blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The burden of the deadly brunt did beare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his shield, which lightly he did throw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over his head before the harme came neare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nathlesse it fell with so despiteous dreare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heavie sway, that hard unto his crowne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The shield it drove, and did the covering reare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therewith both Squire and dwarfe did tomble downe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the earth, and lay long while in senselesse swowne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whereat the Prince full wrath his strong right hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In full avengement heaved up on hie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stroke the Pagan with his steely brand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So sore, that to his saddle-bow thereby</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He bowed low, and so a while did lie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, sure, had not his massie yron mace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Betwixt him and his hurt bene happily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It would have cleft him to the girding place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, as it was, it did astonish him long space.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, when he to himselfe returnd againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All full of rage he gan to curse and sweare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And vow by Mahoune that he should be slaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that his murdrous mace he up did reare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seemed nought the souse thereof could beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therewith smote at him with all his might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, ere that it to him approched neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The royall child with readie quicke foresight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did shun the proofe thereof, and it avoyded light.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, ere his hand he could recure againe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To ward his bodie from the balefull stound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He smote at him with all his might and maine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So furiously that, ere he wist, he found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His head before him tombling on the ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles his babling tongue did yet blaspheme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And curse his God that did him so confound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles his life ran foorth in bloudie streame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His soule descended downe into the Stygian reame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when that Squire beheld, he woxe full glad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see his foe breath out his spright in vaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that same dwarfe right sorie seem’d and sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And howld aloud to see his Lord there slaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rent his haire and scratcht his face for paine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan the Prince at leasure to inquire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the accident there hapned plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And what he was whose eyes did flame with fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All which was thus to him declared by that Squire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“This mightie man,” (quoth he) “whom you have slaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of an huge Geauntesse whylome was bred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by his strength rule to himselfe did gaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of many Nations into thraldome led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mightie kingdomes of his force adred;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom yet he conquer’d not by bloudie fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne hostes of men with banners brode dispred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by the powre of his infectious sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With which he killed all that came within his might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ne was he ever vanquished afore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But ever vanquisht all with whom he fought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne was there man so strong, but he downe bore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne woman yet so faire, but he her brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto his bay, and captived her thought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For most of strength and beautie his desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was spoyle to make, and wast them unto nought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By casting secret flakes of lustfull fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From his false eyes into their harts and parts entire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Therefore Corflambo was he cald aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though namelesse there his bodie now doth lie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet hath he left one daughter that is hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The faire Poeana, who seemes outwardly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So faire as ever yet saw living eie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And were her vertue like her beautie bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She were as faire as any under skie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But ah! she given is to vaine delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke too loose of life, and eke of love too light.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“So, as it fell, there was a gentle Squire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That lov’d a Ladie of high parentage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, for his meane degree might not aspire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To match so high, her friends with counsell sage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dissuaded her from such a disparage:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she, whose hart to love was wholly lent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of his hands could not redeeme her gage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, firmely following her first intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Resolv’d with him to wend, gainst all her friends consent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“So twixt themselves they pointed time and place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which when he according did repaire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An hard mishap and disaventrous case</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him chaunst: instead of his Aemylia faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This Gyants sonne, that lies there on the laire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An headlesse heape, him unawares there caught;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all dismayd through mercilesse despaire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him wretched thrall unto his dongeon brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where he remaines, of all unsuccour’d and unsought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“This Gyants daughter came upon a day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the prison, in her joyous glee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To view the thrals which there in bondage lay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst the rest she chaunced there to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This lovely swaine, the Squire of low degree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom she did her liking lightly cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wooed him her paramour to bee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From day to day she woo’d and prayd him fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for his love him promist libertie at last.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“He, though affide unto a former love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom his faith he firmely ment to hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet seeing not how thence he mote remove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by that meanes which fortune did unfold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her graunted love, but with affection cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To win her grace his libertie to get:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet she him still detaines in captive hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fearing, least if she should him freely set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would her shortly leave, and former love forget.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Yet so much favour she to him hath hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above the rest, that he sometimes may space</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And walke about her gardens of delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having a keeper still with him in place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which keeper is this Dwarfe, her dearling base,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom the keyes of every prison dore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By her committed be, of speciall grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at his will may whom he list restore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And whom he list reserve to be afflicted more.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Whereof when tydings came unto mine eare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full inly sorie, for the fervent zeale</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which I to him as to my soule did beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I thether went; where I did long conceale</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My selfe, till that the Dwarfe did me reveale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And told his Dame her Squire of low degree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did secretly out of her prison steale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For me he did mistake that Squire to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For never two so like did living creature see.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Then was I taken and before her brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, through the likenesse of my outward hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being likewise beguiled in her thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan blame me much for being so untrew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke by flight her fellowship t’eschew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That lov’d me deare, as dearest thing alive.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence she commaunded me to prison new.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof I glad did not gaine say nor strive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But suffred that same Dwarfe me to her dongeon drive.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“There did I finde mine onely faithfull frend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In heavy plight and sad perplexitie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof I sorie, yet myselfe did bend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him to recomfort with my companie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But him the more agreev’d I found thereby:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all his joy, he said, in that distresse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was mine and his Aemylias libertie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Aemylia well he lov’d, as I mote ghesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet greater love to me then her he did professe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But I with better reason him aviz’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shew’d him how, through error and misthought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of our like persons, eath to be disguiz’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or his exchange or freedom might be wrought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereto full loth was he, ne would for ought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Consent that I, who stood all fearelesse free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should wilfully be into thraldome brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till fortune did perforce it so decree:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, over-ruld at last, he did to me agree.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The morrow next, about the wonted howre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Dwarfe cald at the doore of Amyas</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To come forthwith unto his Ladies bowre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Insteed of whom forth came I, Placidas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And undiscerned forth with him did pas.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There with great joyance and with gladsome glee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of faire Pceana I received was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oft imbrast, as if that I were hee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with kind words accoyd, vowing great love to mee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Which I, that was not bent to former love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As was my friend that had her lone refus’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did well accept, as well it did behove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the present neede it wisely usd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My former hardnesse first I faire excusd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after promist large amends to make.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With such smooth termes her error I abusd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To my friends good more then for mine owne sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For whose sole libertie I love and life did stake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thenceforth I found more favour at her hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to her Dwarfe, which had me in his charge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She bad to lighten my too heavie band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And graunt more scope to me to walke at large.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So on a day, as by the flowrie marge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of a fresh streame I with that Elfe did play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Finding no meanes how I might us enlarge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if that Dwarfe I could with me convay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I lightly snatcht him up and with me bore away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thereat he shriekt aloud, that with his cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Tyrant selfe came forth with yelling bray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And me pursew’d; but nathemore would I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forgoe the purchase of my gotten pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But have perforce him hether brought away.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus as they talked, loe! where nigh at hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those Ladies two, yet doubtfull through dismay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In presence came, desirous t’understand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tydings of all which there had hapned on the land.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Where soone as sad Aemylia did espie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her captive lovers friend, young Placidas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All mindlesse of her wonted modestie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She to him ran, and him with streight embras</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enfolding, said; “And lives yet Amyas?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“He lives,” (quoth he) “and his Aemylia loves.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Then lesse,” (said she) “by all the woe I pas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which my weaker patience fortune proves:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But what mishap thus long him fro my selfe removes?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then gan he all this storie to renew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tell the course of his captivitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her deare hart full deepely made to rew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sigh full sore to heare the miserie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which so long he mercilesse did lie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, after many teares and sorrowes spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She deare besought the Prince of remedie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who thereto did with readie will consent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And well performed; as shall appeare by his event.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-9" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>The Squire of low degree, releast,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Paeana takes to wife:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Britomart fightes with many Knights;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Prince Arthur stints their strife.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Hard is the doubt, and difficult to deeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When all three kinds of love together meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And doe dispart the hart with powre extreme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether shall weigh the balance downe; to weet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The deare affection unto kindred sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or raging fire of love to womankind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or zeale of friends combynd with vertues meet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But of them all the band of vertuous mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me seemes, the gentle hart should most assured bind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For naturall affection soone doth cesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And quenched is with Cupids greater flame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But faithfull friendship doth them both suppresse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And them with maystring discipline doth tame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through thoughts aspyring to eternall fame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For as the soule doth rule the earthly masse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the service of the bodie frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So love of soule doth love of bodie passe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No lesse then perfect gold surmounts the meanest brasse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All which who list by tryall to assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall in this storie find approved plaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which these Squires true friendship more did sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then either care of parents could refraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or love of fairest Ladie could constraine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For though Pceana were as faire as morne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet did this trustie squire with proud disdaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For his friends sake her offred favours scorne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she her selfe her syre of whom she was yborne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now, after that Prince Arthur graunted had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To yeeld strong succour to that gentle swayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who now long time had lyen in prison sad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan advise how best he mote darrayne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That enterprize for greatest glories gayne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That headlesse tyrants tronke he reard from ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, having ympt the head to it agayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his usuall beast it firmely bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made it so to ride as it alive was found.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then did he take that chaced Squire, and layd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before the ryder, as he captive were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made his Dwarfe, though with unwilling ayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To guide the beast that did his maister beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till to his castle they approched neare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when the watch, that kept continuall ward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saw comming home, all voide of doubtfull feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He, running downe, the gate to him unbard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom straight the Prince ensuing in together far’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There did he find in her delitious boure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The faire Poeana playing on a Rote</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Complayning of her cruell Paramoure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And singing all her sorrow to the note,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As she had learned readily by rote;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with the sweetnesse of her rare delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Prince halfe rapt began on her to dote;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till better him bethinking of the right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He her unwares attacht, and captive held by might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whence being forth produc’d, when she perceived</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her owne deare sire, she cald to him for aide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when of him no aunswere she received,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But saw him sencelesse by the Squire upstaide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She weened well that then she was betraide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan she loudly cry, and weepe, and waile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that same Squire of treason to upbraide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all in vaine: her plaints might not prevaile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne none there was to reskue her, ne none to baile.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then tooke he that same Dwarfe, and him compeld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To open unto him the prison dore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And forth to bring those thrals which there he held.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence forth were brought to him above a score</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Knights and Squires to him unknowne afore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which he did from bitter bondage free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto former liberty restore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst the rest that Squire of low degree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came forth full weake and wan, not like him selfe to bee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom soone as faire Aemylia beheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Placidas, they both unto him ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him embracing fast betwixt them held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Striving to comfort him all that they can,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And kissing oft his visage pale and wan:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That faire Poeana, them beholding both,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan both envy, and bitterly to ban;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through jealous passion weeping inly wroth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see the sight perforce that both her eyes were loth.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when awhile they had together beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And diversly conferred of their case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She, though full oft she both of them had scene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Asunder, yet not ever in one place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began to doubt, when she them saw embrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which was the captive Squire she lov’d so deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deceived through great likenesse of their face:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For they so like in person did appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she uneath discerned whether whether weare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And eke the Prince, when as he them avized,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their like resemblaunce much admired there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mazd how nature had so well disguized</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her worke, and counterfet her selfe so nere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if that by one patterne, scene somewhere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She had them made a paragone to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or whether it through skill or errour were.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus gazing long at them much wondred he;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So did the other Knights and Squires which them did see.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then gan they ransacke that same Castle strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which he found great store of hoorded threasure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which that tyrant gathered had by wrong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tortious powre, without respect or measure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon all which the Briton Prince made seasure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And afterwards continu’d there a while</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To rest him selfe, and solace in soft pleasure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those weaker Ladies after weary toile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To whom he did divide part of his purchast spoile.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, for more joy, that captive Lady faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The faire Pceana, he enlarged free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by the rest did set in sumptuous chaire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To feast and frollicke; nathemore would she</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shew gladsome countenaunce nor pleasaunt glee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But grieved was for losse both of her sire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke of Lordship with both land and fee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But most she touched was with griefe entire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For losse of her new love, the hope of her desire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But her the Prince, through his well wonted grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To better termes of myldnesse did entreat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From that fowle rudenesse which did her deface;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that same bitter corsive, which did eat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her tender heart and made refraine from meat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He with good thewes and speaches well applyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did mollifie, and calme her raging heat:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For though she were most faire, and goodly dyde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet she it all did mar with cruelty and pride.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, for to shut up all in friendly love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith love was first the ground of all her griefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That trusty Squire he wisely well did move</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not to despise that dame which lov’d him liefe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till he had made of her some better priefe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to accept her to his wedded wife:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereto he offred for to make him chiefe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all her land and lordship during life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He yeelded, and her tooke; so stinted all their strife.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>From that day forth in peace and joyous blis</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They liv’d together long without debate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne private jarre, ne spite of enemis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could shake the safe assuraunce of their state:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And she, whom Nature did so faire create</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she mote match the fairest of her daies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet with lewd loves and lust intemperate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had it defaste, thenceforth reformd her waies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all men much admyrde her change, and spake her praise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus when the Prince had perfectly compylde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These paires of friends in peace and setled rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him selfe, whose minde did travell as with chylde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his old love conceav’d in secret brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Resolved to pursue his former quest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, taking leave of all, with him did beare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Amoret, whom Fortune by bequest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had left in his protection whileare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Exchanged out of one into another feare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Feare of her safety did her not constraine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For well she wist now in a mighty hond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her person, late in perm, did remaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who able was all daungers to withstond:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But now in feare of shame she more did stond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeing her selfe all soly succourlesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Left in the victors powre, like vassall bond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose will her weakenesse could no way represse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In case his burning lust should breake into excesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But cause of feare, sure, had she none at all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of him, who goodly learned had of yore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The course of loose affection to forstall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lawlesse lust to rule with reasons lore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the while he by his side her bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She was as safe as in a Sanctuary.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus many miles they two together wore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To seeke their loves dispersed diversly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet neither showed to other their hearts privity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At length they came whereas a troupe of Knights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They saw together skirmishing, as seemed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sixe they were all, all full of fell despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But foure of them the battell best beseemed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That which of them was best mote not be deemed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These foure were they from whom false Florimel</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By Braggadochio lately was redeemed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet, sterne Druon, and lewd Claribell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love-lavish Blandamour, and lustfull Paridell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Druons delight was all in single life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto Ladies love would lend no leasure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The more was Claribell enraged rife</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With fervent flames, and loved out of measure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So eke lov’d Blandamour, but yet at pleasure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would change his liking, and new Lemans prove;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Paridell of love did make no threasure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But lusted after all that him did move:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So diversly these foure disposed were to love.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But those two other, which beside them stoode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were Britomart and gentle Scudamour;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who all the while beheld their wrathfull moode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wondred at their impacable stoure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose like they never saw till that same houre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So dreadfull strokes each did at other drive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And laid on load with all their might and powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if that every dint the ghost would rive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of their wretched corses, and their lives deprive.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As when Dan Aeolus, in great displeasure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For losse of his deare love by Neptune hent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sends forth the winds out of his hidden threasure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the sea to wreake his fell intent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They breaking forth with rude unruliment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From all foure parts of heaven doe rage full sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tosse the deepes, and teare the firmament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the world confound with wide uprore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if instead thereof they Chaos would restore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Cause of their discord and so fell debate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was for the love of that same snowy maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whome they had lost in Turneyment of late;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, seeking long to weet which way she straid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Met here together, where, through lewd upbraide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Ate and Duessa, they fell out;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And each one taking part in others aide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This cruell conflict raised thereabout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose dangerous successe depended yet in doubt:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For sometimes Paridell and Blandamour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The better had, and bet the others backe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones the others did the field recoure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on his foes did worke full cruell wracke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet neither would their fiendlike fury slacke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But evermore their malice did augment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till that uneath they forced were, for lacke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of breath, their raging rigour to relent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rest themselves for to recover spirits spent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then gan they change their sides, and new parts take;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Paridell did take to Druons side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For old despight which now forth newly brake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst Blandamour, whom alwaies he envide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Blandamour to Claribell relide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So all afresh gan former fight renew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As when two Barkes, this caried with the tide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with the wind, contrary courses sew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If wind and tide doe change, their courses change anew</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thenceforth they much more furiously gan fare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if but then the battell had begonne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne helmets bright ne hawberks strong did spare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That through the clifts the vermeil bloud out sponne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all adowne their riven sides did ronne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such mortall malice wonder was to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In friends profest, and so great outrage donne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But sooth is said, and tride in each degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faint friends when they fall out most cruell fomen bee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus they long while continued in fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till Scudamour and that same Briton maide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By fortune in that place did chance to light:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom soone as they with wrathfull eie bewraide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They gan remember of the fowle upbraide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which that Britonesse had to them donne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In that late Turney for the snowy maide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where she had them both shamefully fordonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke the famous prize of beauty from them wonne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones all burning with a fresh desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of fell revenge, in their malicious mood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They from them selves gan turne their furious ire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cruell blades, yet steeming with whot bloud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against those two let drive, as they were wood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who wondring much at that so sodaine fit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet nought dismayd, them stoutly well withstood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne yeelded foote, ne once abacke did flit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But being doubly smitten likewise doubly smit.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The warlike Dame was on her part assaid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Claribell and Blandamour attone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Paridell and Druon fiercely laid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At Scudamour, both his professed fone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Foure charged two, and two surcharged one;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet did those two them selves so bravely beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That th’other litle gained by the lone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with their owne repayed duely weare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And usury withall: such gaine was gotten deare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Full oftentimes did Britomart assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To speake to them, and some emparlance move;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But they for nought their cruell hands would stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne lend an eare to ought that might behove.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As when an eager mastiffe once doth prove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The tast of bloud of some engored beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No words may rate, nor rigour him remove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From greedy hold of that his blouddy feast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So litle did they hearken to her sweet beheast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whom when the Briton Prince afarre beheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With ods of so unequall match opprest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mighty heart with indignation sweld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And inward grudge fild his heroicke brest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones him selfe he to their aide addrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thrusting fierce into the thickest preace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Divided them, how ever loth to rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And would them faine from battell to surceasse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With gentle words perswading them to friendly peace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But they so farre from peace or patience were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all at once at him gan fiercely flie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lay on load, as they him downe would beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to a storme which hovers under skie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long here and there and round about doth stie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At length breakes downe in raine, and haile, and sleet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First from one coast, till nought thereof be drie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then another, till that likewise fleet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so from side to side till all the world it weet.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But now their forces greatly were decayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Prince yet being fresh untoucht afore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who them with speaches milde gan first disswade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From such foule outrage, and them long forbore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till seeing them through suffrance hartned more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him selfe he bent their furies to abate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And layd at them so sharpely and so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shortly them compelled to retrate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And being brought in daunger to relent too late.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But now his courage being throughly fired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He ment to make them know their follies prise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had not those two him instantly desired</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T’asswage his wrath, and pardon their mesprise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At whose request he gan him selfe advise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To stay his hand, and of a truce to treat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In milder tearmes, as list them to devise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst which the cause of their so cruell heat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He did them aske, who all that passed gan repeat:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And told at large how that same errant Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet faire Britomart, them late had foyled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In open turney, and by wrongfull fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both of their publicke praise had them despoyled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And also of their private loves beguyled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of two full hard to read the harder theft:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she that wrongfull challenge soone assoyled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shew’d that she had not that Lady reft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(As they suppos’d) but her had to her liking left.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom the Prince thus goodly well replied:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Certes, sir Knight, ye seemen much to blame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To rip up wrong that battell once hath tried;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein the honor both of Armes ye shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the love of Ladies foule defame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom the world this franchise ever yeelded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of their loves choise they might freedom clame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in that right should by all knights be shielded:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gainst which, me seemes, this war ye wrongfully have wielded.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And yet” (quoth she) “a greater wrong remaines:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For I thereby my former love have lost;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom seeking ever since with endlesse paines</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath me much sorrow and much travell cost:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Aye me, to see that gentle maide so tost!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Scudamour, then sighing deepe, thus saide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Certes, her losse ought me to sorrow most,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose right she is, where ever she be straide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through many perils wonne, and many fortunes waide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“For from the first that her I love profest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto this houre, this present lucklesse howre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I never joyed happinesse nor rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But thus turmoild from one to other stowre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I wast my life, and doe my daies devowre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In wretched anguishe and incessant woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Passing the measure of my feeble powre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That living thus a wretch, and loving so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I neither can my love ne yet my life forgo.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then good Sir Claribell him thus bespake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Now were it not, sir Scudamour, to you</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dislikefull paine so sad a taske to take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mote we entreat you, sith this gentle crew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is now so well accorded all anew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That as we ride together on our way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye will recount to us in order dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All that adventure which ye did assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that faire Ladies love: past perils well apay.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So gan the rest him likewise to require,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Britomart did him importune hard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To take on him that paine: whose great desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He glad to satisfie, him selfe prepar’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tell through what misfortune he had far’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In that atchievement, as to him befell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all those daungers unto them declar’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which sith they cannot in this Canto well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Comprised be, I will them in another tell.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-10" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Scudamore doth his request tell</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of vertuous Amoret:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Great Venus Temple is describ’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And Lovers life forth set.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>True he it said, what ever man it sayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That love with gall and hony doth abound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if the one be with the other wayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For every dram of hony therein found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A pound of gall doth over it redound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I too true by triall have approved;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For since the day that first with deadly wound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My heart was launcht, and learned to have loved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I never joyed howre, but still with care was moved.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And yet such grace is given them from above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the cares and evill which they meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May nought at all their setled mindes remove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But seeme, gainst common sence, to them most sweet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As hosting in their martyrdome unmeet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So all that ever yet I have endured</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I count as naught, and tread downe under feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since of my love at length I rest assured,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That to disloyalty she will not be allured.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Long were to tell the travell and long toile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through which this shield of love I late have wonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And purchased this peerelesse beauties spoile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That harder may be ended, then begonne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But since ye so desire, your will be donne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then hearke, ye gentle knights and Ladies free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My hard mishaps that ye may learne to shonne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For though sweet love to conquer glorious bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet is the paine thereof much greater then the fee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“What time the fame of this renowmed prise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flew first abroad, and all mens eares possest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I, having armes then taken, gan avise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To winne me honour by some noble gest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And purchase me some place amongst the best.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I boldly thought, (so young mens thoughts are bold)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That this same brave emprize for me did rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that both shield and she whom I behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might be my lucky lot; sith all by lot we hold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“So on that hard adventure forth I went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the place of perill shortly came:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was a temple faire and auncient,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which of great mother Venus bare the name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And farre renowmed through exceeding fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much more then that which was in Paphos built,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that in Cyprus, both long since this same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though all the pillours of the one were guilt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the others pavement were with yvory spilt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And it was seated in an Island strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abounding all with delices most rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wall d by nature gainst invaders wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none mote have accesse, nor inward fare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by one way that passage did prepare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It was a bridge ybuilt in goodly wize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With curious Corbes and pendants graven faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, arched all with porches, did arize</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On stately pillours fram’d after the Doricke guize.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And for defence thereof on th ‘other end</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There reared was a castle faire and strong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That warded all which in or out did wend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And flancked both the bridges sides along,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst all that would it faine to force or wrong:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therein wonned twenty valiant Knights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All twenty tride in warres experience long;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose office was against all manner wights</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By all meanes to maintaine that castels ancient rights.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Before that Castle was an open plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the midst thereof a piller placed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which this shield, of many sought in vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The shield of Love, whose guerdon me hath graced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was hangd on high with golden ribbands laced;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the marble stone was written this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With golden letters goodly well enchaced;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">
						<i>Blessed the man that well can use his blis:</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i>Whose ever be the shield, faire Amoret be his.</i>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Which when I red, my heart did inly earne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pant with hope of that adventures hap:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne stayed further newes thereof to learne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with my speare upon the shield did rap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the castle ringed with the clap.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Streight forth issewd a Knight all arm’d to proofe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bravely mounted to his most mishap:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, staying nought to question from aloofe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ran fierce at me that fire glaunst from his horses hoofe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Whom boldly I encountred (as I could)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by good fortune shortly him unseated.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones outsprung two more of equall mould;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But I them both with equall hap defeated.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So all the twenty I likewise entreated,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And left them groning there upon the plaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, preacing to the pillour, I repeated</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The read thereof for guerdon of my paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And taking downe the shield with me did it retaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“So forth without impediment I past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till to the Bridges utter gate I came;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which I found sure lockt and chained fast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I knockt, but no man aunswred me by name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I cald, but no man answred to my clame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet I persever’d still to knocke and call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till at the last I spide within the same</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where one stood peeping through a crevis small,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To whom I cald aloud, halfe angry therewithall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“That was to weet the Porter of the place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto whose trust the charge thereof was lent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His name was Doubt, that had a double face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th’one forward looking, th’other backeward bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therein resembling Janus auncient</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which hath in charge the ingate of the yeare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evermore his eyes about him went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if some proved perill he did feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or did misdoubt some ill whose cause did not appeare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“On th’one side he, on th’other sate Delay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behinde the gate that none her might espy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose manner was all passengers to stay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And entertaine with her occasions sly:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through which some lost great hope unheedily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which never they recover might againe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And others, quite excluded forth, did ly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long languishing there in unpittied paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seeking often entraunce afterwards in vaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Me when as he had privily espide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bearing the shield which I had conquerd late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He kend it streight, and to me opened wide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So in I past, and streight he closd the gate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But being in, Delay in close awaite</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Caught hold on me, and thought my steps to stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Feigning full many a fond excuse to prate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And time to steale, the threasure of mans day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose smallest minute lost no riches render may.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But by no meanes my way I would forslow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ought that ever she could doe or say;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But from my lofty steede dismounting low</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Past forth on foote, beholding all the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The goodly workes, and stones of rich assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cast into sundry shapes by wondrous skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That like on earth no where I recken may:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And underneath, the river rolling still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With murmure soft, that seem’d to serve the workmans will.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thence forth I passed to the second gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Gate of Good Desert, whose goodly pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And costly frame were long here to relate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The same to all stoode alwaies open wide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in the Porch did evermore abide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An hideous Giant, dreadfull to behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That stopt the entraunce with his spacious stride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with the terrour of his countenance bold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full many did affray, that else faine enter would.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“His name was Daunger, dreaded over-all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who day and night did watch and duely ward</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From fearefull cowards entrance to forstall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And faint-heart-fooles, whom shew of perill hard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could terrific from Fortunes faire adward:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For oftentimes faint hearts, at first espiall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his grim face, were from approaching scard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unworthy they of grace, whom one deniall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Excludes from fairest hope withouten further triall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Yet many doughty warriours, often tride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In greater perils to be stout and bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Durst not the sternnesse of his looke abide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, soone as they his countenance did behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began to faint, and feele their corage cold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Againe, some other, that in hard assaies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were cowards knowne, and litle count did hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Either through gifts, or guile, or such like waies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crept in by stouping low, or stealing of the kaies.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But I, though meanest man of many moe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet much disdaining unto him to lout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or creepe betweene his legs, so in to goe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Resolv’d him to assault with manhood stout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And either beat him in, or drive him out.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones, advauncing that enchaunted shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all my might I gan to lay about:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when he saw, the glaive which he did wield</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He gan forthwith t’avale, and way unto me yield.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“So, as I entred, I did backeward looke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For feare of harme that might lie hidden there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And loe! his hindparts, whereof heed I tooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much more deformed fearefull, ugly were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then all his former parts did earst appere:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For hatred, murther, treason, and despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With many moe lay in ambushment there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Awayting to entrap the warelesse wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which did not them prevent with vigilant foresight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thus having past all perill, I was come</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within the compasse of that Islands space;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which did seeme, unto my simple doome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The onely pleasant and delightfull place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ever troden was of footings trace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all that nature by her mother-wit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could frame in earth, and forme of substance base,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was there; and all that nature did omit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Art, playing second natures part, supplyed it.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“No tree, that is of count, in greenewood growes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From lowest Juniper to Ceder tall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No flowre in field, that daintie odour throwes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And deckes his branch with blossomes over all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But there was planted, or grew naturall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor sense of man so coy and curious nice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But there mote find to please it selfe withall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor hart could wish for any queint device,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But there it present was, and did fraile sense entice.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“In such luxurious plentie of all pleasure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It seem’d a second paradise to gheese,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So lavishly enricht with Natures threasure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That if the happie soules, which doe possesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th’ Elysian fields and live in lasting blesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should happen this with living eye to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They soone would loath their lesser happinesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wish to life return’d againe to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in this joyous place they mote have joyance free.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Fresh shadowes, fit to shroud from sunny ray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire lawnds, to take the sunne in season dew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">bweet springs, in which a thousand JNymphs did play;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soft rombling brookes, that gentle slomber drew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">High reared mounts, the lands about to vew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Low looking dales, disloignd from common gaze;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Delightfull bowres, to solace lovers trew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">False Labyrinthes, fond runners eyes to daze;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All which by nature made did nature selfe amaze.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And all without were walkes and alley es dight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With divers trees enrang’d in even rankes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And here and there were pleasant arbors pight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shadie seates, and sundry flowring bankes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sit and rest the walkers wearie shankes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therein thousand payres of lovers walkt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Praysing their god, and yeelding him great thankes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever ought but of their true loves talkt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne ever for rebuke or blame of any balkt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“All these together by themselves did sport</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their spotlesse pleasures and sweet loves content.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, farre away from these, another sort</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of lovers lincked in true harts consent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which loved not as these for like intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But on chast vertue grounded their desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Farre from all fraud or fayned blandishment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, in their spirits kindling zealous fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brave thoughts and noble deedes did evermore aspire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Such were great Hercules and Hyllus deare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Trew Jonathan and David trustie tryde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stout Theseus and Pirithous his feare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Py lades and Orestes by his syde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Myld Titus and Gesippus without pryde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Damon and Pythias, whom death could not sever:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All these, and all that ever had bene tyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In bands of friendship, there did live for ever;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose lives although decay’d, yet loves decayed never.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Which when as I, that never tasted blis</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor happie howre, beheld with gazefull eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I thought there was none other heaven then this;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gan their endlesse happinesse envye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That being free from feare and gealosye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might frankely there their loves desire possesse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilest I, through paines and perlous jeopardie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was forst to seeke my lifes deare patronnesse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Much dearer be the things which come through hard distresse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Yet all those sights, and all that else I saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might not my steps withhold, but that forthright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto that purposd place I did me draw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where as my love was lodged day and night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The temple of great Venus, that is hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Queene of beautie, and of love the mother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There worshipped of every living wight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose goodly workmanship farre past all other</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ever were on earth, all were they set together.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Not that same famous Temple of Diane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose hight all Ephesus did oversee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And which all Asia sought with vowes prophane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One of the worlds seven wonders sayd to bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might match with this by many a degree:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor that which that wise King of Jurie framed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With endlesse cost to be th’Almighties see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor all, that else through all the world is named</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To all the heathen Gods, might like to this be clamed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“I, much admyring that so goodly frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the porch approcht which open stood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But therein sate an amiable Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seem’d to be of very sober mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in her semblant shew’d great womanhood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strange was her tyre; for on her head a crowne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She wore, much like unto a Danisk hood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Poudred with pearle and stone; and all her gowne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enwoven was with gold, that raught full low adowne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“On either side of her two young men stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both strongly arm’d, as fearing one another;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet were they brethren both of halfe the blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Begotten by two fathers of one mother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though of contrarie natures each to other:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The one of them hight Love, the other Hate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hate was the elder, Love the younger brother;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was the younger stronger in his state</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then th’elder, and him maystred still in all debate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Nathlesse that Dame so well them tempred both,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she them forced hand to joyne in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Albe that Hatred was thereto full loth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And turn’d his face away, as he did stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unwilling to behold that lovely band.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet she was of such grace and vertuous might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her commaundment he could not withstand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But bit his lip for felonous despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gnasht his yron tuskes at that displeasing sight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Concord she cleeped was in common reed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mother of blessed Peace and Friendship trew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They both her twins, both borne of heavenly seed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And she her selfe likewise divinely grew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which right well her workes divine did shew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For strength and wealth and happinesse she lends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strife and warre and anger does subdew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of litle much, of foes she maketh friends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to afflicted minds sweet rest and quiet sends.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“By her the heaven is in his course contained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the world in state unmoved stands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As their Almightie maker first ordained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bound them with inviolable bands;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Else would the waters overflow the lands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fire devoure the ayre, and hell them quight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that she holds them with her blessed hands.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She is the nourse of pleasure and delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And unto Venus grace the gate doth open right.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“By her I entring half dismayed was;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she in gentle wise me entertayned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And twixt her selfe and Love did let me pas;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Hatred would my entrance have restrayned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with his club me threatned to have brayned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had not the Ladie with her powrefull speach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him from his wicked will uneath refrayned;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And th’other eke his malice did empeach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till I was throughly past the perill of his reach.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Into the inmost Temple thus I came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which fuming all with frankensence I found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And odours rising from the altars flame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon an hundred marble pillors round</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The roofe up high was reared from the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All deckt with crownes, and chaynes, and girlands gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thousand pretious gifts worth many a pound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which sad lovers for their vowes did pay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the ground was strow’d with flowres as fresh as May.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“An hundred Altars round about were set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All flaming with their sacrifices fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with the steme thereof the Temple swet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which rould in clouds to heaven did aspire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in them bore true lovers vowes entire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke an hundred brasen caudrons bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bath in joy and amorous desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Every of which was to a damzell hight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all the Priests were damzels in soft linnen dight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Right in the midst the Goddesse selfe did stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon an altar of some costly masse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose substance was uneath to understand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For neither pretious stone, nor durefull brasse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor shining gold, nor mouldring clay it was;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But much more rare and pretious to esteeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pure in aspect, and like to christall glasse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet glasse was not, if one did rightly deeme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, being faire and brickie, likest glasse did seeme.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But it in shape and beautie did excell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All other Idoles which the heathen adore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Farre passing that, which by surpassing skill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Phidias did make in Paphos Isle of yore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which that wretched Greeke, that life forlore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did fall in love: yet this much fairer shined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But covered with the slender veile afore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both her feete and legs together twyned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were with a snake, whose head and tail were fast combyned.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The cause why she was covered with a vele</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was hard to know, for that her Priests the same</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From peoples knowledge labour’d to concele:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But sooth it was not sure for womanish shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor any blemish which the worke mote blame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But for, they say, she hath both kinds in one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both male and female, both under one name:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She syre and mother is her selfe alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Begets and eke conceives, ne needeth other none.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And all about her necke and shoulders flew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A flocke of litle loves, and sports, and joyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With nimble wings of gold and purple hew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose shapes seem’d not like to terrestriall boyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But like to Angels playing heavenly toyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whilest their eldest brother was away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cupid their eldest brother; he enjoyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wide kingdome of love with lordly sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to his law compels all creatures to obay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And all about her altar scattered lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great sorts of lovers piteously complayning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some of their losse, some of their loves delay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some of their pride, some paragons disdayning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some fearing fraud, some fraudulently fayning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As every one had cause of good or ill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst the rest some one, through Loves constrayning</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tormented sore, could not containe it still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thus brake forth, that all the temple it did fill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Great Venus! Queene of beautie and of grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The joy of Gods and men, that under skie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doest fayrest shine, and most adorne thy place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with thy smyling looke doest pacific</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The raging seas, and makst the stormes to flie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thee, goddesse, thee the winds, the clouds doe feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, when thou spredst thy mantle forth on hie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The waters play, and pleasant lands appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And heavens laugh, and al the world shews joyous cheare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Then doth the daedale earth throw forth to thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of her fruitful! lap aboundant flowres;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then all living wights, soone as they see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The spring breake forth out of his lusty bowres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They all doe learne to play the Paramours;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First doe the merry birds, thy prety pages,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Privily pricked with thy lustfull powres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Chirpe loud to thee out of their leavy cages,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thee their mother call to coole their kindly rages.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Then doe the salvage beasts begin to play</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their pleasant friskes, and loath their wonted food</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Lyons rore; the Tygres loudly bray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The raging Buls rebellow through the wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And breaking forth dare tempt the deepest flood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To come where thou doest draw them with desire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So all things else, that nourish vitall blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone as with fury thou doest them inspire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In generation seeke to quench their inward fire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘So all the world by thee at first was made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dayly yet thou doest the same repayre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought on earth that merry is and glade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought on earth that lovely is and fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But thou the same for pleasure didst prepayre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou art the root of all that joyous is:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great God of men and women, queene of th’ayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mother of laughter, and welspring of blisse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O graunt that of my love at last I may not misse!’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“So did he say: but I with murmure soft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That none might heare the sorrow of my hart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet inly gronmg deepe and sighing oft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besought her to graunt ease unto my smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to my wound her gratious help impart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whilest thus I spake, behold! with happy eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I spyde where at the Idoles feet apart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A bevie of fayre damzels close did lye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wayting when as the Antheme should be sung on hye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The first of them did seeme of ryper yeares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And graver countenance then all the rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet all the rest were eke her equall peares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet unto her obayed all the best.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her name was Womanhood; that she exprest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By her sad semblant and demeanure wyse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For stedfast still her eyes did fixed rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne rov’d at randon, after gazers guyse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose luring baytes oftimes doe heedlesse harts entyse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And next to her sate goodly Shamefastnesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever durst her eyes from ground upreare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever once did looke up from her desse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if some blame of evill she did feare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in her cheekes made roses oft appeare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her against sweet Cherefulnesse was placed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose eyes, like twinkling stars in evening cleare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were deckt with smyles that all sad humors chaced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And darted forth delights the which her goodly graced.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And next to her sate sober Modestie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Holding her hand upon her gentle hart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her against sate comely Curtesie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That unto every person knew her part;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her before was seated overthwart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soft Silence, and submisse Obedience,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both linckt together never to dispart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both gifts of God, not gotten but from thence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both girlonds of his Saints against their foes offence.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thus sate they all around in seemely rate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the midst of them a goodly mayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even in the lap of Womanhood there sate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which was all in lilly white aray’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With silver streames amongst the linnen stray’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to the Morne, when first her shyning face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath to the gloomy world itselfe bewray’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That same was fayrest Amoret in place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shyning with beauties light and heavenly vertues grace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Whom soone as I beheld, my hart gan throb</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Andvwade in doubt what best were to be donne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For sacrilege me seem’d the Church to rob,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And folly seem’d to leave the thing undonne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with so strong attempt I had begonne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, shaking off all doubt and shamefast feare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Ladies love, I heard, had never wonne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst men of worth, I to her stepped neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by the lilly hand her labour’d up to reare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thereat that formost matrone me did blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sharpe rebuke for being over bold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saying, it was to Knight unseemely shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a recluse Virgin to lay hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That unto Venus services was sold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom I thus: ‘Nay, but it fitteth best</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Cupids man with Venus mayd to hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ill your goddesse services are drest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By virgins, and her sacrifices let to rest.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“With that my shield I forth to her did show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which all that while I closely had conceld;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which when Cupid, with his killing bow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cruell shafts, emblazond she beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At sight thereof she was with terror queld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said no more: but I, which all that while</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The pledge of faith, her hand, engaged held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like warie Hynd within the weedie soyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For no intreatie would forgoe so glorious spoyle.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And evermore upon the Goddesse face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mine eye was fixt, for feare of her offence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom when I saw with amiable grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To laugh at me, and favour my pretence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I was emboldned with more confidence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And nought for nicenesse nor for envy sparing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In presence of them all forth led her thence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All looking on, and like astonisht staring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet to lay hand on her not one of all them daring.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“She often prayd, and often me besought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometime with tender teares to let her goe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometime with witching smyles; but yet, for nought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ever she to me could say or doe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could she her wished freedome fro me wooe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But forth I led her through the Temple gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which I hardly past with much adoe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that same Ladie, which me friended late</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In entrance, did me also friend in my retrate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“No lesse did Daunger threaten me with dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whenas he saw me, maugre all his powre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That glorious spoyle of beautie with me lead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Cerberus, when Orpheus did recoure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His Leman from the Stygian Princes boure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But evermore my shield did me defend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the storme of every dreadfull stoure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus safely with my love I thence did wend.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So ended he his tale, where I this Canto end.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-11" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Marinells former wound is heald;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">He comes to Proteus hall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where Thamës doth the Medway wed</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And feasts the sea-gods all.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But ah for pittie! that I have thus long</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Left a fay re Ladie languishing in payne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now well-away! that I have doen such wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To let faire Florimell in bands remayne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In bands of love, and in sad thraldomes chayne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From which, unlessesome heavenly powre her free</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By miracle, not yet appearing playne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She lenger yet is like captiv’d to bee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That even to thinke thereof it inly pitties mee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Here neede you to remember, how erewhile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unlovely Proteus, missing to his mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Virgins love to win by wit or wile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her threw into a dongeon deepe and blind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there in chaynes her cruelly did bind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hope thereby her to his bent to draw:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, when as neither gifts nor graces kind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her constant mind could move at all he saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He thought her to compell by crueltie and awe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Deepe in the bottome of an huge great rocke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dongeon was, in which her bound he left,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That neither yron barres, nor brasen locke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did neede to gard from force, or secret theft</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all her lovers which would her have reft:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For wall’d it was with waves, which rag’d and ror’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As they the cliffe in peeces would have cleft;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besides ten thousand monsters foule abhor’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did waite about it, gaping griesly, all begor’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And in the midst thereof did horror dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And darkenesse dredd that never viewed day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to the balefull house of lowest hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which old Styx her aged bones alway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Old Styx the Grandame of the Gods, doth lay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There did this lucklesse mayd seven months abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever evening saw, ne mornings ray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ever from the day the night descride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thought it all one night that did no houres divide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And all this was for love of Marinell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who her despysd (ah! who would her despyse?)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wemens love did from his hart expell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all those joyes that weake mankind entyse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nathlesse his pride full dearely he did pryse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For of a womans hand it was ywroke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of the wound he yet in languor lyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne can be cured of that cruell stroke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which Britomart him gave, when he did her provoke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet farre and neare the Nymph his mother sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many salves did to his sore applie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many herbes did use. But when as nought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She saw, could ease his rankling maladie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last to Tryphon she for helpe did hie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(This Tryphon is the seagods surgeon hight,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom she besought to find some remedie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for his paines a whistle him behight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That of a fishes shell was wrought with rare delight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So well that Leach did hearke to her request,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did so well employ his carefull paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in short space his hurts he had redrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him restor’d to healthfull state againe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which he long time after did remaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There with the Nymph his mother, like her thrall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who sore against his will did him retaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For feare of perill which to him mote fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through his too ventrous prowesse proved over all.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It fortun’d then, a solemne feast was there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To all the Sea-gods and their fruitfull seede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In honour of the spousalls which then were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Betwixt the Medway and the Thames agreed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long had the Thames (as we in records reed)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before that day her wooed to his bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the proud Nymph would for no worldly meed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor no entreatie, to his love be led;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till now, at last relenting, she to him was wed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So both agreed that this their bridale feast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should for the Gods in Proteus house be made;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which they all repayr’d, both most and least,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As well which in the mightie Ocean trade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As that in rivers swim, or brookes doe wade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which, not if an hundred tongues to tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hundred mouthes, and voice of brasse I had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And endlesse memorie that mote excell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In order as they came could I recount them well.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Helpe, therefore, O! thou sacred imp of Jove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The noursling of Dame Memorie his deare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom those rolles, layd up in heaven above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And records of antiquitie appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which no wit of man may comen neare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Helpe me to tell the names of all those floods</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all those Nymphes, which then assembled were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To that great banquet of the watry Gods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all their sundry kinds, and all their hid abodes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>First came great Neptune, with his threeforkt mace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That rules the Seas and makes them rise or fall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His dewy lockes did drop with brine apace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under his Diademe imperiall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by his side his Queene with coronall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Amphitrite, most divinely faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose yvorie shoulders weren covered all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As with a robe, with her owne silver haire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And deckt with pearles which th’ Indian seas for her prepaire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>These marched farre afore the other crew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the way before them, as they went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Triton his trompet shrill before them blew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For goodly triumph and great jollyment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That made the rockes to roare as they were rent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after them the royall issue came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which of them sprung by lineall descent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First the Sea-gods, which to themselves doe clame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The powre to rule the billowes, and the waves to tame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Phorcys, the father of that fatall brood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By whom those old Heroes wonne such fame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Glaucus, that wise southsayes understood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tragicke Inoes sonne, the which became</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A God of seas through his mad mothers blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now hight Palemon, and is saylers frend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great Brontes; and Astrasus, that did shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himselfe with incest of his kin unkend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And huge Orion, that doth tempests still portend;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The rich Cteatus; and Eurytus long;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Neleus and Pelias, lovely brethren both;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mightie Chrysaor; and Caicus strong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eurypulus, that calmes the waters wroth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And faire Euphoemus, that upon them goth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As on the ground, without dismay or dread;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fierce Eryx; and Alebius, that know’th</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The waters depth, and doth their bottome tread;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sad Asopus, comely with his hoarie head.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There also some most famous founders were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of puissant Nations which the world possest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet sonnes of Neptune, now assembled here:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ancient Ogyges, even th’auncientest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Inachus renowmd above the rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Phoenix, and Aon, and Pelasgus old;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great Belus, Phoeax, and Agenor best;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mightie Albion, father of the bold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And warlike people which the Britaine Islands hold:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For Albion the sonne of Neptune was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, for the proofe of his great puissance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of his Albion did on dry-foot pas</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into old Gall, that now is cleeped France,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To fight with Hercules, that did advance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To vanquish all the world with matchlesse might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there his mortall part by great mischance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was slaine; but that which is th’immortall spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lives still, and to this feast with Neptunes seed was dight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But what doe I their names seeke to reherse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which all the world have with their issue fild?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How can they all in this so narrow verse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Contayned be, and in small compasse hild?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let them record them that are better skild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And know the moniments of passed age:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Onely what needeth shall be here fulfild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T’expresse some part of that great equipage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which from great Neptune do derive their parentage.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Next came the aged Ocean and his Dame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Old Tethys, th’oldest two of all the rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all the rest of those two parents came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which afterward both sea and land possest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all which Nereus, th’eldest and the best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did first proceed, then which none more upright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne more sincere in word and deed profest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most voide of guile, most free from fowle despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doing him selfe, and teaching others to doe right.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereto he was expert in prophecies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And could the ledden of the gods unfold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through which, when Paris brought his famous prise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The faire Tindarid lasse, he him fortold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her all Greece with many a champion bold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should fetch againe, and finally destroy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proud Priams towne. So wise is Nereus old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so well skild; nathlesse he takes great joy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oft-times amongst the wanton Nymphs to sport and toy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And after him the famous rivers came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which doe the earth enrich and beautifie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fertile Nile, which creatures new doth frame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long Rhodanus, whose sourse springs from the skie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faire Ister, flowing from the mountaines hie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Divine Scamander, purpled yet with blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Greeks and Trojans which therein did die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pactolus glistring with his golden flood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Tygris fierce, whose streames of none may be withstood;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Great Ganges, and immortall Euphrates,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deepe Indus, and Maeander intricate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Slow Peneus, and tempestuous Phasides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Swift Rhene, and Alpheus still immaculate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ooraxes, feared for great Cyrus fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tybris, renowmed for the Romaines fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rich Oranochy, though but knowen late;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that huge River, which doth beare his name</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of warlike Amazons, who doe possesse the same.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Joy on those warlike women, which so long</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can from all men so rich a kingdome hold!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shame on you, O men! which boast your strong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And valiant hearts, in thoughts lesse hard and bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet quaile in conquest of that land of gold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But this to you, O Britons! most pertaines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom the right hereof it selfe hath sold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which, for sparing litle cost or paines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loose so immortall glory, and so endlesse gaines.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then was there heard a most celestiall sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of dainty musicke, which did next ensew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before the spouse: that was Arion crownd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, playing on his harpe, unto him drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The eares and hearts of all that goodly crew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That even yet the Dolphin, which him bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through the Agaean seas from Pirates vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stood still by him astonisht at his lore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the raging seas for joy forgot to rore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So went he playing on the watery plaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soone after whom the lovely Bridegroome came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The noble Thamis, with all his goodly traine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But him before there went, as best became,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His auncient parents, namely th’auncient Thame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But much more aged was his wife then he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Ouze, whom men doe Isis rightly name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full weake and crooked creature seemed shee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And almost blind through eld, that scarce her way could see.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therefore on either side she was sustained</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of two smal grooms, which by their names were hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Churne and Charwell, two small streames, which pained</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them selves her footing to direcl: aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which fayled oft through faint and feeble plight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Thame was stronger, and of better stay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet seem’d full aged by his outward sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With head all hoary, and his beard all gray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deawed with silver drops that trickled downe alway.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And eke he somewhat seem’d to stoupe afore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With bowed backe, by reason of the lode</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And auncient heavy burden which he bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that faire City, wherein make abode</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So many learned impes, that shoote abrode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with their braunches spred all Britany,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No lesse then do her elder sisters broode.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Joy to you both, ye double noursery</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Arts! but, Oxford, thine doth Thame most glorify.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But he their sonne full fresh and jolly was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All decked in a robe of watchet hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which the waves, glittering like Christall glas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So cunningly enwoven were, that few</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could weenen whether they were false or trew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on his head like to a Coronet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He wore, that seemed strange to common vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which were many towres and castels set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it encompast round as with a golden fret.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like as the mother of the Gods, they say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In her great iron charet wonts to ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When to Joves pallace she doth take her way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Old Cybele, arayd with pompous pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wearing a Diademe embattild wide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hundred turrets, like a Turribant;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With such an one was Thamis beautifide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was to weet the famous Troynovant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which her kingdomes throne is chiefly resiant.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And round about him many a pretty Page</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Attended duely, ready to obay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All little Rivers which owe vassallage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To him, as to their Lord, and tribute pay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The chaulky Kenet, and the Thetis gray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The morish Cole, and the soft sliding Breane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wanton Lee, that oft doth loose his way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the still Darent, in whose waters cleane</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ten thousand fishes play and decke his pleasant streame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then came his neighbour flouds which nigh him dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And water all the English soile throughout:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They all on him this day attended well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with meet service waited him about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne none disdained low to him to lout:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No, not the stately Severne grudg’d at all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne storming Humber, though he looked stout;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But both him honor’d as their principall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let their swelling waters low before him fall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There was the speedy Tamar, which devides</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Cornish and the Devonish confines;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through both whose borders swiftly downe it glides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, meeting Plim, to Plimmouth thence declines:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Dart, nigh chockt with sands of tinny mines.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Avon marched in more stately path,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proud of his Adamants with which he shines</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And glisters wide, as als’ of wondrous Bath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Bristow faire, which on his waves he builded hath.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And there came Stoure with terrible aspect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bearing his sixe deformed heads on hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That doth his course through Blandford plains direct,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And washeth Winborne meades in season drye.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Next him went Wylibourne with passage slye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of his wylinesse his name doth take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of him selfe doth name the shire thereby:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Mole, that like a nousling Mole doth make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His way still under ground, till Thamis he overtake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then came the Rother, decked all with woods</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like a wood God, and flowing fast to Rhy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Sture, that parteth with his pleasant floods</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Easterne Saxons from the Southerne ny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Clare and Harwitch both doth beautify:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him follow’d Yar, soft washing Norwitch wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with him brought a present joyfully</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his owne fish unto their festivall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose like none else could shew, the which they Ruffins call,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Next these the plenteous Ouse came far from land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By many a city and by many a towne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many rivers taking under-hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into his waters as he passeth downe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Cle, the Were, the Grant, the Sture, the Rowne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence doth by Huntingdon and Cambridge flit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My mother Cambridge, whom as with a Crowne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He doth adorne, and is adorn’d of it</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With many a gentle Muse and many a learned wit.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And after him the fatall Welland went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, if old sawes prove true (which God forbid!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall drowne all Holland with his excrement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shall see Stamford, though now homely hid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then shine in learning, more than ever did</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cambridge or Oxford, Englands goodly beames.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And next to him the Nene downe softly slid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bounteous Trent, that in him selfe enseames</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both thirty sorts of fish, and thirty sundry streames.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Next these came Tyne, along whose stony bancke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Romaine Monarch built a brasen wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which mote the feebled Britons strongly flancke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the Pidts that swarmed over-all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which yet thereof Gualsever they doe call:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Twede, the limit betwixt Logris land</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Albany: And Eden, though but small,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet often stainde with bloud of many a band</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Scots ancl English both, that tyned on his strand.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then came those sixe sad brethren, like forlorne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That whilome were (as antique fathers tell)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sixe valiant Knights of one faire Nymphe yborne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which did in noble deedes of armes excell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wonned there where now Yorke people dwell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still Ure, swift Werfe, and Oze the most of might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">High Swale, unquiet Nide, and troublous Skell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All whom a Scythian king, that Humber hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slew cruelly, and in the river drowned quight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But past not long ere Brutus warlicke sonne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Locrinus, them aveng’d, and the same date,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which the proud Humber unto them had donne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By equall dome repayd on his owne pate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For in the selfe same river, where he late</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had drenched them, he drowned him againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And nam’d the river of his wretched fate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose bad condition yet it doth retaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oft tossed with his stormes which therein still remaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>These after came the stony shallow Lone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to old Loncaster his name doth lend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And following Dee, which Britons long ygone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did call divine, that doth by Chester tend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Conway, which out of his streame doth send</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Plenty of pearles to decke his dames withall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Lindus that his pikes doth most commend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which the auncient Lincolne men doe call:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All these together marched toward Proteus hall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne thence the Irishe Rivers absent were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith no lesse famous then the rest they bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And joyne in neighbourhood of kingdome nere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why should they not likewise in love agree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And joy likewise this solemne day to see?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They saw it all, and present were in place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though I them all according their degree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cannot recount, nor tell their hidden race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor read the salvage cuntreis thorough which they pace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There was the Liffy rolling downe the lea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sandy Slane, the stony Aubrian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The spacious Shenan spreading like a sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The pleasant Boyne, the fishy fruitfull Ban,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Swift Awniduff, which of the English man</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is cal’de Blacke-water, and the Liffar deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sad Trowis, that once his people over-ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strong Allo tombling from Slewlogher steep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Mulla mine, whose waves I whilom taught to weep.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And there the three renowmed brethren were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which that great Gyant Blomius begot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the faire Nimph Rheusa wandring there.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One day, as she to shunne the season whot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under Slewboome in shady grove was got,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This Gyant found her and by force deflowr’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereof conceiving, she in time forth brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These three faire sons, which being thenceforth powrd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In three great rivers ran, and many countreis scowrd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The first the gentle Shure that, making way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By sweet Clonmell, adornes rich Waterford;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The next, the stubborne Newre whose waters gray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By faire Kilkenny and Rosseponte boord;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The third, the goodly Barow which doth hoord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great heapes of salmons in his deepe bosome:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which, long sundred, doe at last accord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To joyne in one, ere to the sea they come;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, flowing all from one, all one at last become.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There also was the wide embayed Mayre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The pleasaunt Bandon crownd with many a wood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The spreading Lee that, like an Island fayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Encloseth Corke with his devided flood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And balefull Oure, late staind with English blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With many more whose names no tongue can tell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which that day in order seemly good</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did on the Thamis attend, and waited well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To doe their dueful service, as to them befell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then came the Bride, the lovely Medua came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Clad in a vesture of unknowen geare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And uncouth fashion, yet her well became,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seem’d like silver, sprinckled here and theare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With glittering spangs that did like starres appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wav’d upon, like water Chamelot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hide the metall, which yet every where</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bewrayd it selfe, to let men plainely wot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was no mortall worke, that seem’d and yet was not.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her goodly lockes adowne her backe did flow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto her waste, with flowres bescattered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which ambrosiall odours forth did throw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To all about, and all her shoulders spred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As a new spring; and likewise on her hed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Chapelet of sundry flowers she wore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From under which the deawy humour shed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did tricle downe her haire, like to the hore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Congealed litle drops which doe the morne adore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>On her two pretty handmaides did attend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One cald the Theise, the other cald the Crane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which on her waited things amisse to mend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both behind upheld her spredding traine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under the which her feet appeared plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her silver feet, faire washt against this day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her before there paced Pages twaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both clad in colours like, and like array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Doune and eke the Frith, both which prepard her way.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And after these the Sea Nymphs marched all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All goodly damzels, deckt with long greene haire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom of their sire Nereides men call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which the Oceans daughter to him bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gray-eyde Doris; all which fifty are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which she there on her attending had:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Swift Proto, milde Eucrate, Thetis faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soft Spio, sweete Endore, Sao sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Light Doto, wanton Glauce, and Galene glad;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>White hand Eunica, proud Dynamene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Joyous Thalia, goodly Amphitrite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lovely Pasithee, kinde Eulimene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lightfoote Cymothoe, and sweete Melite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fairest Pherusa, Phao lilly white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wondred Agave, Poris, and Nesaea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Erato that doth in love delite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Panopae, and wise Protomedaea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And snowy neckd Doris, and milkewhite Galathaea;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Speedy Hippothoe, and chaste Adtea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Large Lisianassa, and Pronaea sage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Euagore, and light Pontoporea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And she that with her least word can asswage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The surging seas, when they do sorest rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cymodoce, and stout Autonoe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Neso, and Eione well in age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, seeming still to smile, Glauconome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she that hight of many heastes Polynome;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Fresh Alimeda deckt with girlond greene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hyponeo with salt-bedewed wrests;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Laomedia like the christall sheene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Liagore much praisd for wise behests;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Psamathe for her brode snowy brests;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cymo, Eupompe, and Themiste just;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, she that vertue loves and vice detests,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Euarna, and Menippe true in trust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Nemertea learned well to rule her lust.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All these the daughters of old Nereus were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which have the sea in charge to them assinde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To rule his tides, and surges to uprere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bring forth stormes, or fast them to upbinde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sailers save from wreckes of wrathfull winde.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet, besides, three thousand more there were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of th’Oceans seede, but Joves and Phoebus kinde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which in floods and fountaines doe appere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all mankinde do nourish with their waters clere.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The which, more eath it were for mortall wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tell the sands, or count the starres on hye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ought more hard, then thinke to reckon right.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But well I wote that these, which I descry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were present at this great solemnity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there, amongst the rest, the mother was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of luckelesse Marinell, Cymodoce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, for my Muse her selfe now tyred has,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto an other Canto I will overpas.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="canto-4-12" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Marin, for love of Florimell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In langour wastes his life;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Nymph, his mother getteth her</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And gives to him for wife.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>O! what an endlesse worke have I in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To count the seas abundant progeny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose fruitfull seede farre passeth those in land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And also those which wonne in th’azure sky:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For much more eath to tell the starres on hy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Albe they endlesse seeme in estimation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then to recount the Seas posterity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So fertile be the flouds in generation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So huge their numbers, and so numberlesse their nation.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therefore the antique wisards well invented</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Venus of the fomy sea was bred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that the seas by her are most augmented:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Witnesse th’exceeding fry which there are fed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wondrous sholes which may of none be red.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, blame me not if I have err’d in count</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Gods, of Nymphs, of rivers, yet unred;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For though their numbers do much more surmount,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet all those same were there which erst I did recount.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All those were there, and many other more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose names and nations were too long to tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Proteus house they fild even to the dore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet were they all in order, as befell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">According their degrees disposed well.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst the rest was faire Cymodoce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The mother of unlucky Marinell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who thither with her came, to learne and see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The manner of the Gods when they at banquet be.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But for he was halfe mortall, being bred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of mortall sire, though of immortall wombe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He might not with immortall food be fed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne with th’eternall Gods to bancket come;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But walkt abrode, and round about did rome</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To view the building of that uncouth place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seem’d unlike unto his earthly home:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where, as he to and fro by chaunce did trace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There unto him betid a disaventrous case.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Under the hanging of an hideous clieffe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He heard the lamentable voice of one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That piteously complaind her carefull grieffe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which never she before disclosd to none,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to her selfe her sorrow did bemone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So feelingly her case she did complaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ruth it moved in the rocky stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made it seeme to feele her grievous paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And oft to grone with billowes beating from the maine</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Though vaine, I see, my sorrowes to unfold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And count my cares when none is nigh to heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, hoping griefe may lessen being told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I will them tell though unto no man neare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For heaven, that unto all lends equall eare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is farre from hearing of my heavy plight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lowest hell, to which I lie most neare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cares not what evils hap to wretched wight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And greedy seas doe in the spoile of life delight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Yet loe! the seas, I see, by often beating</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe pearce the rockes, and hardest marble weares;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But his hard rocky hart for no entreating</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will yeeld, but when my piteous plaints he heares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is hardned more with my aboundant teares:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet though he never list to me relent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But let me waste in woe my wretched yeares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet will I never of my love repent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But joy that for his sake I suffer prisonment.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And when my weary ghost, with griefe outworne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By timely death shall winne her wished rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let then this plaint unto his eares be borne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That blame it is to him, that armes profest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To let her die whom he might have redrest.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There did she pause, inforced to give place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the passion that her heart opprest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, after she had wept and wail’d a space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She gan afresh thus to renew her wretched case.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ye Gods of seas, if any Gods at all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have care of right, or ruth of wretches wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By one or other way me, woefull thrall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deliver hence out of this dungeon strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which I daily dying am too long:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if ye deeme me death for loving one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That loves not me, then doe it not prolong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But let me die and end my dales attone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let him live unlov’d, or love him selfe alone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But if that life ye unto me decree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then let mee live as lovers ought to do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of my lifes deare love beloved be:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if he should through pride your doome undo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do you by duresse him compell thereto,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in this prison put him here with me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One prison fittest is to hold us two.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So had I rather to be thrall then free;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such thraldome or such freedome let it surely be.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But O vaine judgement, and conditions vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which the prisoner points unto the free!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whiles I him condemne, and deeme his paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He where he list goes loose, and laughes at me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So ever loose, so ever happy be!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But where so loose or happy that thou art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Know, Marinell, that all this is for thee.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With that she wept and wail’d, as if her hart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would quite have burst through great abundance of her smart.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All which complaint when Marinell had heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And understood the cause of all her care</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To come of him for using her so hard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His stubborne heart, that never felt misfare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was toucht with soft remorse and pitty rare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That even for griefe of minde he oft did grone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And inly wish that in his powre it weare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her to redresse: but since he meanes found none,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He could no more but her great misery bemone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus whilst his stony heart with tender ruth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was toucht, and mighty courage mollifide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dame Venus sonne, that tameth stubborne youth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With iron bit, and maketh him abide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till like a victor on his backe he ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into his mouth his maystring bridle threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That made him stoupe, till he did him bestride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan he make him tread his steps anew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And learne to love by learning lovers paines to rew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now gan he in his grieved minde devise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How from that dungeon he might her enlarge.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some while he thought, by faire and humble wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Proteus selfe to sue for her discharge:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But then he fear’d his mothers former charge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst womens love, long given him in vaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan he thinke, perforce with sword and targe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her forth to fetch, and Proteus to constraine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But soone he gan such folly to forthinke againe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then did he cast to steale her thence away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with him beare where none of her might know:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all in vaine, for-why he found no way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To enter in, or issue forth below;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all about that rocke the sea did flow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And though unto his will she given were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet without ship or bote her thence to row,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He wist not how her thence away to bere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And daunger well he wist long to continue there.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As last, when as no meanes he could invent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Backe to him selfe he gan returne the blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was the author of her punishment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with vile curses and reprochfull shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To damne him selfe by every evil name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And deeme unworthy or of love or life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That had despisde so chast and faire a dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which him had sought through trouble and long strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet had refusde a God that her had sought to wife.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In this sad plight he walked here and there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And romed round about the rocke in vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he had lost him selfe he wist not where;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oft listening if he mote her heare againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And still bemoning her unworthy paine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like as an Hynde, whose calfe is falne unwares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into some pit, where she him heares complaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An hundred times about the pit side fares</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right sorrowfully mourning her bereaved cares.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now by this the feast was throughly ended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every one gan homeward to resort:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which seeing, Marinell was sore offended</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That his departure thence should be so short,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And leave his love in that sea-walled fort.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet durst he not his mother disobay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But her attending in full seemly sort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did march amongst the many all the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the way did inly mourne, like one astray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Being returned to his mothers bowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In solitary silence, far from wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gan record the lamentable stowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which his wretched love lay day and night</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For his deare sake, that ill deserv’d that plight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The thought whereof empierst his hart so deepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of no worldly thing he tooke delight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne dayly food did take, ne nightly sleepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But pyn’d, and mourn’d, and languisht, and alone did weepe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That in short space his wonted chearefull hew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan fade, and lively spirits deaded quight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His cheeke-bones raw, and eie-pits hollow grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And brawney armes had lost their knowen might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That nothing like himselfe he seem’d in sight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere long so weake of limbe, and sicke of love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He woxe, that lenger he note stand upright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to his bed was brought, and layd above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like ruefull ghost, unable once to stirre or move.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when his mother saw, she in her mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was troubled sore, ne wist well what to weene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne could by search nor any meanes out find</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The secret cause and nature of his teene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereby she might apply some medicine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But weeping day and night did him attend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mourn’d to see her losse before her eyne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which griev’d her more that she it could not mend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see an helplesse evill double griefe doth lend.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nought could she read the roote of his disease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne weene what mister maladie it is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereby to seeke some meanes it to appease.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most did she thinke, but most she thought amis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That that same former fatall wound of his</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whyleare by Tryphon was not throughly healed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But closely rankled under th’orifis:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Least did she thinke, that which he most concealed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That love it was, which in his hart lay unrevealed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therefore to Tryphon she againe doth hast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him doth chyde as false and fraudulent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That fayld the trust which she in him had plast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To cure her sonne, as he his faith had lent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who now was falne into new languishment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his old hurt, which was not throughly cured.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So backe he came unto her patient;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where searching every part, her well assured</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it was no old sore which his new paine procured;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But that it was some other maladie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or grief unknowne, which he could not discerne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So left he her withouten remedie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then gan her heart to faint, and quake, and earne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And inly troubled was the truth to learne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto himselfe she came, and him besought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now with faire speches, now with threatnings sterne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If ought lay hidden in his grieved thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It to reveale; who still her answered, there was nought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nathlesse she rested not so satisfide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But leaving watry gods, as booting nought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the shinie heaven in haste she hide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thence Apollo, King of Leaches, brought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Apollo came; who, soone as he had sought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through his disease, did by and by out find</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he did languish of some inward thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which afflicted his engrieved mind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which love he red to be, that leads each living kind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when he had unto his mother told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She gan thereat to fret and greatly grieve;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, comming to her sonne, gan first to scold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chyde at him that made her misbelieve:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But afterwards she gan him soft to shrieve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wooe with fair intreatie, to disclose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which of the Nymphes his heart so sore did mieve;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For sure she weend it was some one of those,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which he had lately scene, that for his love he chose.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now lesse she feared that same fatall read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That warned him of womens love beware,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which being ment of mortall creatures sead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For love of Nymphes she thought she need not care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But promist him, what ever wight she weare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she her love to him would shortly gaine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So he her told: but soone as she did heare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Florimell it was which wrought his paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She gan afresh to chafe, and grieve in every vaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet since she saw the streight extremitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which his life unluckily was lay’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It was no time to scan the prophecie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether old Proteus true or false had sayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That his decay should happen by a mayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It’s late in death of daunger to advize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or love forbid him, that is life denayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But rather gan in troubled mind devize</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How she that Ladies libertie might enterprize.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To Proteus selfe to sew she thought it vaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who was the root and worker of her woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor unto any meaner to complaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But unto great king Neptune selfe did goe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, on her knee before him falling lowe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made humble suit unto his Majestic</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To graunt to her her sonnes life, which his foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A cruell Tyrant, had presumpteouslie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By wicked doome condemn’d a wretched death to die.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom God Neptune, softly smyling, thus:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Daughter, me seemes of double wrong ye plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gainst one that hath both wronged you and us;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For death t’adward I ween’d did appertaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To none but to the seas sole Soveraine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Read therefore who it is which this hath wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for what cause; the truth discover plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For never wight so evill did or thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But would some rightfull cause pretend, though rightly nought.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom she answer’d: “Then, it is by name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proteus, that hath ordayn’d my sonne to die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that a waift, the which by fortune came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon your seas, he claym’d as propertie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet nor his, nor his in equitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yours the waift by high prerogative.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore I humbly crave your Majestic</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It to replevie, and my sonne reprive.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So shall you by one gift save all us three alive.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He graunted it: and streight his warrant made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under the Sea-gods scale autenticall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Commaunding Proteus straight t’enlarge the mayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which wandring on his seas imperiall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He lately tooke, and sithence kept as thrall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which she receiving with meete thankefulnesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Departed straight to Proteus therewithall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, reading it with inward loathfulnesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was grieved to restore the pledge he did possesse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet durst he not the warrant to withstand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But unto her delivered Florimell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom she receiving by the lilly hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Admyr’d her beautie much, as she mote well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she all living creatures did excell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And was right joyous that she gotten had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So faire a wife for her sonne Marinell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So home with her she streight the virgin lad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shewed her to him, then being sore bestad.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who soone as he beheld that angels face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adorn’d with all divine perfection,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His cheared heart eftsoones away gan chace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sad death, revived with her sweet inspection,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And feeble spirit inly felt refection:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As withered weed through cruell winters tine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That feeles the warmth of sunny beames reflection,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Liftes up his head that did before decline,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gins to spread his leafe before the faire sunshine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Right so himselfe did Marinell upreare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When he in place his dearest love did spy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And though his limbs could not his bodie beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne former strength returne so suddenly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet chearefull signes he shewed outwardly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne lesse was she in secret hart affected,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that she masked it with modestie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For feare she should of lightnesse be detected:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which to another place I leave to be perfected.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
