<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Dedicatory Sonnets</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter">
		<section id="dedication-3" epub:type="dedication z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Dedicatory Sonnets</h2>
			<section id="sonnet-1">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Sonnet</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">To the Right honourable Sir Christopher Hatton, Lord high Chauncelor of England, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Those prudent heads, that with their counsels wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whylom the pillours of th’earth did sustaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And taught ambitious Rome to tyrannise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the neck of all the world to rayne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oft from those grave affaires were wont abstaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the sweet Lady Muses for to play:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So Ennius the elder Africane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So Maro oft did Caesars cares allay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So you, great Lord, that with your counsell sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The burdeine of this kingdom mightily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With like delightes sometimes may eke delay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rugged brow of carefull Policy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to these ydle rymes lend litle space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which for their titles sake may find more grace.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sonnet-2">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Sonnet</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">To the right honourable the <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Lo.</abbr> Burleigh, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Lo.</abbr> high Threasurer of England.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>To you, right noble Lord, whose carefull brest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To menage of most grave affaires is bent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on whose mightie shoulders most doth rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The burdein of this kingdomes governement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the wide compasse of the firmament</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On Atlas mighty shoulders is upstayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unfitly I these ydle rimes present,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The labor of lost time, and wit unstayd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet if their deeper sence be inly wayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the dim vele, with which from commune vew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their fairer parts are hid, aside be layd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perhaps not vaine they may appeare to you.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as they be, vouchsafe them to receave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wipe their faults out of your censure grave.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sonnet-3">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Sonnet</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">To the right Honourable the Earle of Oxenford, Lord high Chamberlayne of England <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Receive, most Noble Lord, in gentle gree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The unripe fruit of an unready wit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which by thy countenaunce doth crave to bee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Defended from foule Envies poisnous bit.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which so to doe may thee right well besit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith th’antique glory of thine auncestry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under a shady vele is therein writ,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke thine owne long living memory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Succeeding them in true nobility:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And also for the love which thou doest beare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To th’ Heliconian ymps, and they to thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They unto thee, and thou to them, most deare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deare as thou art unto thy selfe, so love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That loves and honours thee, as doth behove.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sonnet-4">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Sonnet</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">To the right honourable the Earle of Northumberland.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The sacred Muses have made alwaies clame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be the Nourses of nobility,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Registres of everlasting fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To all that armes professe and chevalry.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, by like right the noble Progeny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which them succeed in fame and worth, are tyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T’embrace the service of sweete Poetry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By whose endevours they are glorifide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke from all, of whom it is envide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To patronize the authour of their praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which gives them life, that els would soone have dide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And crownes their ashes with immortall baies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thee, therefore, right noble Lord, I send</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This present of my paines, it to defend.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sonnet-5">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Sonnet</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">To the right honourable the Earle of Cumberland.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Redoubted Lord, in whose corageous mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The flowre of chevalry, now bloosming faire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth promise fruite worthy the noble kind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which of their praises have left you the haire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To you this humble present I prepare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For love of vertue and of Martial praise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which though nobly ye inclined are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As goodlie well ye shew’d in late assaies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet brave ensample of long passed daies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which trew honor yee may fashiond see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To like desire of honor may ye raise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fill your mind with magnanimitee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Receive it, Lord, therefore, as it was ment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For honor of your name and high descent.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sonnet-6">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Sonnet</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">To the most honourable and excellent <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Lo.</abbr> the Earle of Essex, Great Maister of the Horse to her Highnesse, and knight of the Noble order of the Garter, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Magnificke Lord, whose vertues excellent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe merit a most famous Poets witt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be thy living praises instrument,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet doe not sdeigne to let thy name be writt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In this base Poeme, for thee far unfitt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nought is thy worth disparaged thereby;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when my Muse, whose fethers, nothing flitt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doe yet but flagg, and lowly learne to fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With bolder wing shall dare alofte to sty</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the last praises of this Faery Queene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then shall it make more famous memory</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of thine Heroicke parts, such as they beene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till then, vouchsafe thy noble countenaunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To these first labours needed furtheraunce.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sonnet-7">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Sonnet</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">To the right Honourable the Earle of Ormond and Ossory.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Receive, most noble Lord, a simple taste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the wilde fruit which salvage soyl hath bred;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, being through long wars left almost waste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With brutish barbarisme is overspredd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, in so faire a land as may be redd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not one Parnassus, nor one Helicone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Left for sweete Muses to be harboured,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But where thy selfe hast thy brave mansione:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There, in deede, dwel faire Graces many one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gentle Nymphes, delights of learned wits;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in thy person, without paragone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All goodly bountie and true honour sits.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such, therefore, as that wasted soyl doth yield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Receive, dear Lord, in worth, the fruit of barren field.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sonnet-8">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Sonnet</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">To the right honourable the Lord Ch. Howard, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Lo.</abbr> high Admiral of England, knight of the noble order of the Garter, and one of her Majesties privie Counsel, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And ye, brave Lord, whose goodly personage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And noble deeds, each other garnishing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Make you ensample to the present age</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of th’old Heroes, whose famous ofspring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The antique Poets wont so much to sing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In this same Pageaunt have a worthy place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith those huge castles of Castilian King,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That vainly threatned kingdomes to displace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like flying doves ye did before you chace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that proud people, woxen insolent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through many victories, didst first deface:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy praises everlasting monument</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is in this verse engraven semblably,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it may live to all posterity.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sonnet-9">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Sonnet</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">To the right honourable the Lord of Hunsdon, high Chamberlaine to her Majesty.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Renowmed Lord, that, for your worthinesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And noble deeds, have your deserved place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">High in the favour of that Emperesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The worlds sole glory and her sexes grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here eke of right have you a worthie place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both for your nearnes to that Faerie Queene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for your owne high merit in like cace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which, apparaunt proofe was to be scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that tumultuous rage and fearfull deene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Northerne rebels ye did pacify,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And their disloiall powre defaced clene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The record of enduring memory.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Live, Lord, for ever in this lasting verse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all posteritie thy honor may reherse.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sonnet-10">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Sonnet</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">To the most renowned and valiant Lord, the Lord Grey of Wilton, knight of the Noble order of the Garter, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Most Noble Lord, the pillor of my life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Patrone of my Muses pupillage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through whose large bountie, poured on me rife</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the first season of my feeble age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I now doe live, bound yours by vassalage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith nothing ever may redeeme, nor reave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of your endlesse debt, so sure a gage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vouchsafe in worth this small guift to receave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which in your noble hands for pledge I leave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the rest that I am tyde t’account:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rude rymes, the which a rustick Muse did weave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In savadge soyle, far from Parnasso Mount,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And roughly wrought in an unlearned Loome:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which vouchsafe, dear Lord, your favorable doome.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sonnet-11">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Sonnet</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">To the right honourable the Lord of Buckhurst, one of her Majesties privie Counsell.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In vain I thinke, right honourable Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By this rude ryme to memorize thy name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose learned Muse hath writ her owne record</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In golden verse, worthy immortal fame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou much more fit (were leasure to the same)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy gracious Soverains praises to compile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her imperiall Majestic to frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In loftie numbers and heroicke stile.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, sith thou maist not so, give leave a while</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To baser wit his power therein to spend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose grosse defaults thy daintie pen may file,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unadvised oversights amend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But evermore vouchsafe it to maintaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against vile Zoilus backbitings vaine.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sonnet-12">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Sonnet</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">To the right honourable Sir <abbr>Fr.</abbr> Walsingham, knight, principal Secretary to her Majesty, and one of her honourable privy Counsell.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>That Mantuane Poets incompared spirit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose girland now is set in highest place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had not Mecaenas, for his worthy merit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It first advaunst to great Augustus grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might long perhaps have lien in silence bace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne bene so much admir’d of later age.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This lowly Muse, that learns like steps to trace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flies for like aide unto your Patronage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That are the great Mecaenas of this age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As wel to al that civil artes professe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As those that are inspir’d with Martial rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And craves protection of her feeblenesse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which if ye yield, perhaps ye may her rayse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In bigger tunes to sound your living prayse.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sonnet-13">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Sonnet</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">To the right noble Lord and most valiaunt Captaine, Sir John Norris, knight, Lord president of Mounster.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Who ever gave more honourable prize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the sweet Muse then did the Martiall crew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That their brave deeds she might immortalise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In her shril tromp, and sound their praises dew?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who then ought more to favour her then you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Moste noble Lord, the honor of this age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Precedent of all that armes ensue?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose warlike prowesse and manly courage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tempred with reason and advizement sage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath fild sad Belgicke with victorious spoile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Fraunce and Ireland left a famous gage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lately shakt the Lusitanian soile.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sith, then, each where thou hast dispredd thy fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love him that hath eternized your name.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sonnet-14">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Sonnet</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">To the right noble and valorous knight, Sir Walter Raleigh, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Lo.</abbr> Wardein of the Stanneryes, and lieftenaunt of Cornewaile.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>To thee, that art the sommers Nightingale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy soveraine Qoddesses most deare delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why doe I send this rusticke Madrigale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That may thy tunefull eare unseason quite?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou onely fit this Argument to write,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In whose high thoughts Pleasure hath built her bowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dainty love learnd sweetly to endite.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My rimes I know unsavory and sowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tast the streames that, like a golden showre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flow from thy fruitfull head, of thy love’s praise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fitter, perhaps, to thonder Martiall stowre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When so thee list thy lofty Muse to raise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, till that thou thy Poeme wilt make knowne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let thy faire Cinthias praises be thus rudely showne.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sonnet-15">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Sonnet</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">To the right honourable and most vertuous Lady the Countesse of Penbroke.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Remembraunce of that most Heroicke spirit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hevens pride, the glory of our daies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which now triumpheth, through immortall merit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his brave vertues, crown’d with lasting baies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of hevenlie blis and everlasting praies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who first my Muse did lift out of the flore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sing his sweet delights in lowlie laies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bids me, most noble Lady, to adore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His goodly image, living evermore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the divine resemblaunce of your face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with your vertues ye embellish more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And native beauty deck with heavenlie grace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For his, and for your owne especial sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vouchsafe from him this toke in good worth to take.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sonnet-16">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Sonnet</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">To the most vertuous and beautifull Lady, the Lady Carew.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Ne may I, without blot of endlesse blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You, fairest Lady, leave out of this place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with remembraunce of your gracious name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith that courtly garlond most ye grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And deck the world, adorne these verses base.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not that these few lines can in them comprise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those glorious ornaments of hevenly grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith ye triumph over feeble eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in subdued harts do tyranyse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thereunto doth need a golden quill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And silver leaves, them rightly to devise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to make humble present of good will:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, whenas timely meanes it purchase may,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In ampler wise it selfe will forth display.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sonnet-17">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Sonnet</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">To all the gratious and beautifull Ladies in the Court.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The Chian Peinter, when he was requirde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To pourtraift Venus in her perfect hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make his worke more absolute, desird</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the fairest Maides to have the vew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Much more me needs, to draw the semblant trew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of beauties Queene, the worlds sole wonderment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sharpe my sence with sundry beauties vew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And steale from each some part of ornament.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If all the world to seeke I overwent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A fairer crew yet no where could I see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then that brave court doth to mine eie present;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the worlds pride seemes gathered there to bee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of each a part I stole by cunning thefte:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgive it me, faire Dames, sith lesse ye have not lefte.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
