<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Mutability: Legend of Constancy</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="mutability" epub:type="part z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Mutability</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="subtitle">Legend of Constancy</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="mutability-canto-6" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Proud Change (not pleased in mortall things</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Beneath the Moone to raigne)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pretends, as well of Gods, as Men,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To be the Soveraine.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>What man that sees the ever-whirling wheele,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Change, the which all mortall things doth sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that therby doth find, and plainly feele,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How <b>Mutability</b> in them doth play</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her cruell sports to many mens decay?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which that to all may better yet appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I will rehearse that whylome I heard say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How she at first her selfe began to reare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gainst all the Gods, and th’empire sought from them to beare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But first, here falleth fittest to unfold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her antique race and linage ancient,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As I have found it registred of old</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Faery Land mongst records permanent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She was, to weet, a daughter by descent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of those old Titans that did whylome strive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Saturnes sonne for heavens regiment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom though high Jove of kingdome did deprive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet many of their stemme long after did survive:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And many of them afterwards obtained</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great power of Jove, and high authority:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Hecaté, in whose almighty hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He plac’t all rule and principalitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be by her disposed diversly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Gods and men, as she them list divide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And drad Bellona, that doth sound on hie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Warres and allarums unto Nations wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That makes both heaven and earth to tremble at her pride.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So likewise did this Titanesse aspire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rule and dominion to her selfe to gaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That as a Goddesse men might her admire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heavenly honors yield, as to them twaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And first, on earth she sought it to obtaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where shee such proofe and sad examples shewed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her great power, to many ones great paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That not men onely (whom she soone subdewed)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But eke all other creatures her bad dooings rewed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For she the face of earthly things so changed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all which Nature had establisht first</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In good estate, and in meet order ranged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She did pervert, and all their statutes burst:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the worlds faire frame (which none yet durst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Gods or men to alter or misguide)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She alter’d quite; and made them all accurst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That God had blest, and did at first provide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In that still happy state for ever to abide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ne shee the lawes of Nature onely brake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But eke of Justice, and of Policie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wrong of right, and bad of good did make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And death for life exchanged foolishlie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since which all living wights have learn’d to die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all this world is woxen daily worse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O pittious worke of <b>Mutability</b>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which we all are subject to that curse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And death, instead of life, have sucked from our Nurse!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now, when all the earth she thus had brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To her behest, and thralled to her might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She gan to cast in her ambitious thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T’attempt the empire of the heavens hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Jove himselfe to shoulder from his right.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And first, she past the region of the ayre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of the fire, whose substance thin and slight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made no resistance, ne could her contraire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ready passage to her pleasure did prepaire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thence to the Circle of the Moone she clambe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where Cynthia raignes in everlasting glory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whose bright shining palace straight she came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All fairely deckt with heavens goodly storie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose silver gates (by which there sate an hory</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Old aged Sire, with hower-glasse in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hight Time,) she entred, were he liefe or sory;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne staide till she the highest stage had scand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where Cynthia did sit, that never still did stand.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her sitting on an Ivory throne shee found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drawne of two steeds, th’one black, the other white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Environd with tenne thousand starres around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That duly her attended day and night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by her side there ran her Page, that hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vesper, whom we the Evening-starre intend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with his Torche, still twinkling like twylight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her lightened all the way where she should wend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And joy to weary wandring travailers did lend:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That when the hardy Titanesse beheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The goodly building of her Palace bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made of the heavens substance, and up-held</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With thousand Crystall pillors of huge hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She gan to burne in her ambitious spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And t’envie her that in such glory raigned.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eftsoones she cast by force and tortious might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her to displace, and to her selfe to have gained</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The kingdome of the Night, and waters by her wained.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Boldly she bid the Goddesse downe descend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And let her selfe into that Ivory throne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she her selfe more worthy thereof wend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And better able it to guide alone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether to men, whose fall she did bemone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or unto Gods, whose state she did maligne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or to th’infernall Powers her need give lone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her faire light and bounty most benigne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her selfe of all that rule she deemed most condigne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But she, that had to her that soveraigne seat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By highest Jove assign’d, therein to beare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nights burning lamp, regarded not her threat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne yielded ought for favour or for feare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with sterne count’naunce and disdainfull cheare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bending her horned browes, did put her back;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, boldly blaming her for comming there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bade her attonce from heavens coast to pack,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or at her perill bide the wrathfull Thunders wrack.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet nathemore the Giantesse forbare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But boldly preacing-on raught forth her hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To pluck her downe perforce from off her chaire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, there-with lifting up her golden wand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Threatned to strike her if she did with-stand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where-at the starres, which round about her blazed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the Moones bright wagon still did stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All beeing with so bold attempt amazed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on her uncouth habit and sterne looke still gazed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Mean-while the lower World, which nothing knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all that chaunced heere, was darkned quite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the heavens, and all the heavenly crew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of happy wights, now unpurvaid of light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were much afraid, and wondred at that sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fearing least Chaos broken had his chaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And brought againe on them eternall night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But chiefely Mercury, that next doth raigne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ran forth in haste unto the king of Gods to plaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All ran together with a great out-cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Joves faire palace fixt in heavens hight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, beating at his gates full earnestly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gan call to him aloud with all their might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To know what meant that suddaine lacke of light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The father of the Gods, when this he heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was troubled much at their so strange affright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doubting least Typhon were againe uprear’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or other his old foes that once him sorely fear’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones the sonne of Maia forth he sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Downe to the Circle of the Moone, to knowe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cause of this so strange astonishment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And why she did her wonted course forslowe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if that any were on earth belowe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That did with charmes or Magick her molest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him to attache, and downe to hell to throwe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if from heaven it were, then to arrest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Author, and him bring before his presence prest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The wingd-foot God so fast his plumes did beat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That soone he came where-as the Titanesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was striving with faire Cynthia for her seat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At whose strange sight and haughty hardinesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He wondred much, and feared her no lesse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet laying feare aside to doe his charge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last he bade her (with bold stedfastnesse)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ceasse to molest the Moone to walke at large,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or come before high Jove her dooings to discharge.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And there-with-all he on her shoulder laid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His snaky-wreathed Mace, whose awfull power</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth make both Gods and hellish fiends affraid:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where-at the Titanesse did sternly lower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stoutly answer’d, that in evill hower</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He from his Jove such message to her brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bid her leave faire Cynthia’s silver bower;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith shee his Jove and him esteemed nought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more then Cynthia’s selfe; but all their kingdoms sought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Heavens Herald staid not to reply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But past away, his doings to relate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto his Lord; who now, in th’highest sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was placed in his principall Estate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all the Gods about him congregate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom when Hermes had his message told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It did them all exceedingly amate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save Jove; who, changing nought his count’nance bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did unto them at length these speeches wise unfold;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Harken to mee awhile, yee heavenly Powers!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye may remember since th’Earths cursed seed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sought to assaile the heavens eternall towers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to us all exceeding feare did breed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, how we then defeated all their deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yee all do knowe, and them destroyed quite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet not so quite, but that there did succeed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An off-spring of their bloud, which did alite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the fruitfull earth, which doth us yet despite.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Of that bad seed is this bold woman bred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That now with bold presumption doth aspire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To thrust faire Phoebe from her silver bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke our selves from heavens high Empire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If that her might were match to her desire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherefore it now behoves us to advise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What way is best to drive her to retire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether by open force, or counsell wise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Areed, ye sonnes of God, as best as ye can devise.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So having said, he ceast; and with his brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(His black eye-brow, whose doomefull dreaded beck</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is wont to wield the world unto his vow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And even the highest Powers of heaven to check)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made signe to them in their degrees to speake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who straight gan cast their counsell grave and wise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mean-while th’Earths daughter, thogh she nought did reck</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Hermes message, yet gan now advise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What course were best to take in this hot bold emprize.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones she thus resolv’d; that whil’st the Gods</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(After returne of Hermes Embassie)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were troubled, and amongst themselves at ods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before they could new counsels re-allie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To set upon them in that extasie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And take what fortune, time, and place would lend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So forth she rose, and through the purest sky</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Joves high Palace straight cast to ascend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To prosecute her plot. Good on-set boads good end.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Shee there arriving boldly in did pass;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where all the Gods she found in counsell close.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All quite unarm’d, as then their manner was.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At sight of her they suddaine all arose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In great amaze, ne wist what way to chose:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Jove, all fearlesse, forc’t them to aby;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his soveraine throne gan straight dispose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himselfe, more full of grace and Majestie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That mote encheare his friends, and foes mote terrifie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That when the haughty Titanesse beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All were she fraught with pride and impudence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet with the sight thereof was almost queld;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, inly quaking, seem’d as reft of sense</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And voyd of speech in that drad audience,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until that Jove himselfe her selfe bespake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Speake, thou fraile woman, speake with confidence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence art thou, and what doost thou here now make?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What idle errand hast thou earths mansion to forsake?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She, halfe confused with his great commaund,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet gathering spirit of her natures pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him boldly answer’d thus to his demaund:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“I am a daughter, by the mothers side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her that is Grand-mother magnifide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the Gods, great Earth, great Chaos child;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by the fathers, (be it not envide)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I greater am in bloud (whereon I build)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then all the Gods, though wrongfully from heaven exil’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“For Titan (as ye all acknowledge must)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was Saturnes elder brother by birth-right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both sonnes of Uranus; but by unjust</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And guilefull meanes, through Corybantes slight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The younger thrust the elder from his right:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since which thou, Jove, injuriously hast held</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Heavens rule from Titans sonnes by might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And them to hellish dungeons downe hast feld.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Witnesse, ye Heavens, the truth of all that I have teld!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whil’st she thus spake, the Gods, that gave good eare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To her bold words, and marked well her grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Beeing of stature tall as any there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the Gods, and beautifull of face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As any of the Goddesses in place,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stood all astonied; like a sort of steeres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst whom some beast of strange and forraine race</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unwares is chaunc’t, far straying from his peeres:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So did their ghastly gaze bewray their hidden feares.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Till, having pauz’d awhile, Jove thus bespake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Will never mortall thoughts ceasse to aspire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In this bold sort to Heaven claime to make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And touch celestiall seats with earthly mire?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I would have thought that bold Procrustes hire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or Typhons fall, or proud Ixions paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or great Prometheus tasting of our ire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would have suffiz’d the rest for to restraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And warn’d all men by their example to refraine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But now this off-scum of that cursed fry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dare to renew the like bold enterprize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chalenge th’ heritage of this our skie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom what should hinder, but that we likewise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should handle as the rest of her allies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thunder-drive to hell?” With that, he shooke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His Nectar-deawed locks, with which the skyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the world beneath for terror quooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eft his burning levin-brond in hand he tooke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when he looked on her lovely face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which faire beames of beauty did appeare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That could the greatest wrath soone turne to grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Such sway doth beauty even in Heaven beare)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He staid his hand; and, having chang’d his cheare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He thus againe in milder wise began:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“But ah! if Gods should strive with flesh yfere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then shortly should the progeny of man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be rooted out, if Jove should do still what he can.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But thee, faire Titans child, I rather weene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through some vaine errour, or inducement light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see that mortall eyes have never seene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or through ensample of thy sisters might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bellona, whose great glory thou doost spight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since thou hast seene her dreadfull power belowe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst wretched men (dismaide with her affright)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bandie Crownes, and Kingdoms to bestowe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sure thy worth no lesse then hers doth seem to showe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But wote thou this, thou hardy Titanesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That not the worth of any living wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May challenge ought in Heavens interesse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much lesse the Title of old Titans Right:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For we by conquest, of our soveraine might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by eternal doome of Fates decree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have wonne the Empire of the Heavens bright;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to our selves we hold, and to whom wee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall worthy deeme partakers of our blisse to bee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Then ceasse thy idle claime, thou foolish gerle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seeke by grace and goodnesse to obtaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That place, from which by folly Titan fell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There to thou maist perhaps, if so thou faine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have Jove thy gracious Lord and Soveraine.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So having said, she thus to him replide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Ceasse, Saturnes sonne, to seeke by proffers vaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of idle hopes t’allure me to thy side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For to betray my Right before I have it tride.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But thee, O Jove! no equall Judge I deeme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of my desert, or of my dewfull Right;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in thine owne behalfe maist partiall seeme:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to the highest him, that is behight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Father of Gods and men by equall might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet, the God of Nature, I appeale.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There-at Jove wexed wroth, and in his spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did inly grudge, yet did it well conceale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bade Dan Phœbus scribe her Appellation seale.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eftsoones the time and place appointed were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where all, both heavenly Powers and earthly wights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before great Natures presence should appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For triall of their Titles and best Rights:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was, to weet, upon the highest hights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Arlo-hill (Who knowes not Arlo-hill?)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is the highest head (in all mens sights)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of my old father <b>Mole</b>, whom Shepheards quill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Renowmed hath with hymnes fit for a rurall skill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, were it not ill fitting for this file</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sing of hilles and woods mongst warres and Knights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I would abate the sternenesse of my stile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mongst these sterne stounds to mingle soft delights;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tell how Arlo, through Dianaes spights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Beeing of old the best and fairest Hill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was in all this holy Islands hights)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was made the most unpleasant and most ill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meane-while, O Clio! lend Calliope thy quill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whylome when <b>Ireland</b> florished in fame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of wealths and goodnesse, far above the rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all that beare the British Islands name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gods then us’d (for pleasure and for rest)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oft to resort there-to, when seem’d them best;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But none of all there-in more pleasure found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Cynthia, that is soveraine Queene profest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of woods and forrests which therein abound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sprinkled with wholsom waters more then most on ground:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But mongst them all, as fittest for her game,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eyther for chace of beasts with hound or boawe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or for to shrowde in shade from Phœbus flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or bathe in fountaines that do freshly flowe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or from high hilles or from the dales belowe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She chose this Arlo; where she did resort</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all her Nymphes enranged on a rowe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With whom the woody Gods did oft consort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For with the Nymphes the Satyres love to play and sport.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Amongst the which there was a Nymph that hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Molanna; daughter of old Father Mole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sister unto Mulla faire and bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto whose bed false Bregog whylome stole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Shepheard Colin dearely did condole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made her lucklesse loves well knowne to be:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But this Molanna, were she not so shole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were no lesse faire and beautifull then shee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, as she is, a fayrer flood may no man see.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For, first, she springs out of two marble Rocks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which a grove of Oakes high-mounted growes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That as a girlond seemes to deck the locks</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of som faire Bride, brought forth with pompous showes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of her bowre, that many flowers strowes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So through the flowry Dales she tumbling downe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through many woods and shady coverts flowes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(That on each side her silver channell crowne)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till to the Plaine she come, whose Valleyes she doth drowne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In her sweet streames Diana used oft</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(After her sweaty chace and toylesome play)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bathe her selfe; and, after, on the soft</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And downy grasse her dainty limbes to lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In covert shade, where none behold her may;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For much she hated sight of living eye.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Foolish god Faunus, though full many a day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He saw her clad, yet longed foolishly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see her naked mongst her Nymphes in privity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>No way he found to compasse his desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to corrupt Molanna, this her maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her to discover for some secret hire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So her with flattering words he first assaid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after, pleasing gifts for her purvaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Queene-apples, and red Cherries from the tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which he her allured, and betrayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tell what time he might her Lady see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When she her selfe did bathe, that he might secret bee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There-to he promist, if shee would him pleasure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With this small boone, to quit her with a better;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet, that where-as shee had out of measure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long lov’d the Fanchin, who by nought did set her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he would undertake for this to get her</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be his Love, and of him liked well:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besides all which, he vow’d to be her debter</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For many moe good turnes then he would tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The least of which this little pleasure should excell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The simple mayd did yield to him anone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eft him placed where he close might view</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That never any saw, save onely one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, for his hire to so foole-hardy dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was of his hounds devour’d in Hunters hew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho, as her manner was on sunny day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Diana, with her Nymphes about her, drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To this sweet spring; where, doffing her array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She bath’d her lovely limbes, for Jove a likely pray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There Faunus saw that pleased much his eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made his hart to tickle in his brest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, for great joy of some-what he did spy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He could him not containe in silent rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, breaking forth in laughter, loud profest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His foolish thought: A foolish Faune indeed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That couldst not hold thy selfe so hidden blest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wouldest needs thine owne conceit areed!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Babblers unworthy been of so divine a meed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Goddesse, all abashed with that noise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In haste forth started from the guilty brooke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, running straight where-as she heard his voice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enclos’d the bush about, and there him tooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like darred Larke, not daring up to looke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On her whose sight before so much he sought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence forth they drew him by the hornes, and shooke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nigh all to peeces, that they left him nought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then into the open light they forth him brought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like as an huswife, that with busie care</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thinks of her Dairy to make wondrous gaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Finding where-as some wicked beast unware</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That breakes into her Dayr’ house, there doth draine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her creaming pannes, and frustrate all her paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath, in some snare or gin set close behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Entrapped him, and caught into her traine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then thinkes what punishment were best assign’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thousand deathes deviseth in her vengefull mind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So did Diana and her maydens all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Use silly Faunus, now within their baile:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They mocke and scorne him, and him foule miscall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some by the nose him pluckt, some by the taile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by his goatish beard some did him haile:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet he (poore soule!) with patience all did beare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For nought against their wils might countervaile:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought he said, what ever he did heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, hanging downe his head, did like a Mome appeare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At length, when they had flouted him their fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They gan to cast what penaunce him to give.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some would have gelt him; but that same would spill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Wood-gods breed, which must for ever live:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Others would through the river him have drive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ducked deepe; but that seem’d penaunce light:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But most agreed, and did this sentence give,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him in Deares skin to clad; and in that plight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hunt him with their hounds, him selfe save how hee might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Cynthia’s selfe, more angry then the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thought not enough to punish him in sport,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of her shame to make a gamesome jest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But gan examine him in straighter sort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which of her Nymphes, or other close consort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him thither brought, and her to him betraid?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He, much affeard, to her confessed short</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ’twas Molanna which her so bewraid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then all attonce their hands upon Molanna laid.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But him (according as they had decreed)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a Deeres-skin they covered, and then chast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all their hounds that after him did speed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he, more speedy, from them fled more fast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then any Deere, so sore him dread aghast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They after followed all with shrill out-cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shouting as they the heavens would have brast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the woods and dales, where he did flie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did ring againe, and loud re-eccho to the skie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So they him follow’d till they weary were;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When, back returning to Molann’ againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They, by commaund’ment of Diana, there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her whelm’d with stones. Yet Faunus (for her paine)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her beloved Fanchin did obtaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That her he would receive unto his bed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So now her waves passe through a pleasant Plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till with the Fanchin she her selfe do wed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And (both combin’d) themselves in one faire river spred.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nath’lesse Diana, full of indignation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence-forth abandond her delicious brooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In whose sweet streame, before that bad occasion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So much delight to bathe her limbes she tooke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne onely her, but also quite forsooke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All those faire forrests about Arlo hid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all that Mountaine, which doth over-looke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The richest champain that may else be rid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the faire Shure, in which are thousand Salmons bred.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Them all, and all that she so deare did way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence-forth she left; and, parting from the place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There-on an heavy haplesse curse did lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To weet, that Wolves, where she was wont to space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should harbour’d be and all those Woods deface,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Thieves should rob and spoile that Coast around:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since which, those Woods, and all that goodly Chase</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth to this day with Wolves and Thieves abound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which too-too true that lands in-dwellers since have found.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="mutability-canto-7" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
					</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Pealing, from Iove, to Natures Bar,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Bold Alteration pleades</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Large Evidence: but Nature soone</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Her righteous Doom areads.</span>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Ah! whither doost thou now, thou greater Muse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me from these woods and pleasing forrests bring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And my fraile spirit, (that dooth oft refuse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This too high flight, unfit for her weake wing)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lift up aloft, to tell of heavens King</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Thy soveraine Sire) his fortunate successe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And victory in bigger notes to sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he obtain’d against that Titanesse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That him of heavens Empire sought to dispossesse?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet, sith I needs must follow thy behest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do thou my weaker wit with skill inspire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fit for this turne; and in my feeble brest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kindle fresh sparks of that immortall fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which learned minds inflameth with desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of heavenly things: for who, but thou alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That art yborne of heaven and heavenly Sire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can tell things doen in heaven so long ygone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So farre past memory of man that may be knowne?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now, at the time that was before agreed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th ds ass e m bled all on Arlo Hill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As well those that are sprung of heavenly seed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As those that all the other world do fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rule both sea and land unto their will:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Onely th’infernall Powers might not appeare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As well for horror of their count’naunce ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As for th’unruly fiends which they did feare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet Pluto and Proserpina were present there.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And thither also came all other creatures,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What-ever life or motion do retaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">According to their sundry kinds of features,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Arlo scarsly could them all containe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So full they filled every hill and Plaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And had not Natures Sergeant (that is Order)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Them well disposed by his busie paine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And raunged farre abroad in every border,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They would have caused much confusion and disorder.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then forth issewed (great goddesse) great dame Nature</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With goodly port and gracious Majesty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being far greater and more tall of stature</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then any of the gods or Powers on hie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet certes by her face and physnomy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether she man or woman inly were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That could not any creature well descry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For with a veile, that wimpled every where,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her head and face was hid that mote to none appeare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That, some do say, was so by skill devized,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hide the terror of her uncouth hew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From mortall eyes that should be sore agrized;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that her face did like a Lion shew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That eye of wight could not indure to view:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But others tell that it so beautious was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And round about such beames of splendor threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it the Sunne a thousand times did pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne could be seene but like an image in a glass.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That well may seemen true; for well I weene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That this same day when she on Arlo sat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her garment was so bright and wondrous sheene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That my fraile wit cannot devize to what</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It to compare, nor finde like stuffe to that:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As those three sacred Saints, though else most wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet on mount Thabor quite their wits forgat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When they their glorious Lord in strange disguise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Transfigur’d sawe; his garments so did daze their eyes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In a fayre Plaine upon an equall Hill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She placed was in a pavilion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not such as Craftes-men by their idle skill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are wont for Princes states to fashion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But th’Earth herselfe, of her owne motion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of her fruitfull bosome made to growe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most dainty trees, that, shooting up anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did seeme to bow their bloosming heads full lowe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For homage unto her, and like a throne did showe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So hard it is for any living wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All her array and vestiments to tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That old Dan Geffrey (in whose gentle spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The pure well head of Poesie did dwell)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his <em>Foules parley</em> durst not with it mel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But it transferd to Alane, who he thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had in his <em>Plaint of kinde</em> describ’d it well:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which who will read set forth so as it ought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go seek he out that Alane where he may be sought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And all the earth far underneath her feete</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was dight with flowers that voluntary grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the ground, and sent forth odours sweet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tenne thousand mores of sundry sent and hew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That might delight the smell, or please the view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The which the Nymphes from all the brooks thereby</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had gathered, they at her foot-stoole threw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That richer seem’d then any tapestry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Princes bowres adorne with painted imagery.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And Mole himselfe, to honour her the more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did deck himselfe in freshest faire attire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his high head, that seemeth alwayes hore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hardned frosts of former winters ire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He with an Oaken girlond now did tire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if the love of some new Nymph, late seene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had in him kindled youthfull fresh desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made him change his gray attire to greene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, gentle Mole! such joyance hath thee well beseene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Was never so great joyance since the day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the gods whylome assembled were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On Haemus hill in their divine array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To celebrate the solemne bridall cheare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Twixt Peleus and Dame Thetis pointed there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where Phœbus selfe, that god of Poets hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They say, did sing the spousall hymne full cleere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the gods were ravisht with delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his celestiall song, and Musicks wondrous might.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This great Grandmother of all creatures bred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great Nature, ever young, yet full of eld;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still mooving, yet unmoved from her sted;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unseene of any, yet of all beheld;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus sitting in her throne, as I have teld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before her came dame Mutability;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, being lowe before her presence feld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With meek obaysance and humilitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus gan her plaintif Plea with words to amplifie:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“To thee, O greatest Goddesse, onely great!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An humble suppliant loe! I lowely fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeking for Right, which I of thee entreat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who Right to all dost deale indifferently,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Damning all Wrong and tortious Injurie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which any of thy creatures do to other</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Oppressing them with power unequally,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith of them all thou art the equall mother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And knittest each to each, as brother unto brother.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“To thee therefore of this same Jove I plaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of his fellow gods that faine to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That challenge to themselves the whole worlds raign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which the greatest part is due to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heaven it selfe by heritage in Fee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For heaven and earth I both alike do deeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sith heaven and earth are both alike to thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gods no more then men thou doest esteeme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For even the gods to thee, as men to gods, do seeme.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Then weigh, O soveraigne goddesse! by what right</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These gods do claime the worlds whole soverainty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that is onely dew unto thy might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arrogate to themselves ambitiously:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As for the gods owne principality,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Jove usurpes unjustly, that to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My heritage Jove’s selfe cannot denie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From my great Grandsire Titan unto mee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deriv’d by dew descent; as is well knowen to thee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Yet mauger Jove, and all his gods beside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I do possesse the worlds most regiment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if ye please it into parts divide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every parts inholders to convent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall to your eyes appeare incontinent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, first, the Earth (great mother of us all)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That only seemes unmov’d and permanent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto Mutabilitie not thrall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet is she chang’d in part, and eeke in generall:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For all that from her springs, and is ybredde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How-ever faire it flourish for a time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet see we soone decay; and, being dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To turne againe unto their earthly slime:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, out of their decay and mortall crime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We daily see new creatures to arize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of their Winter spring another Prime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unlike in forme, and chang’d by strange disguise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So turne they still about, and change in restlesse wise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“As for her tenants, that is, man and beasts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The beasts we daily see massacred dy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As thralls and vassals unto mens beheasts;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And men themselves do change continually,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From youth to eld, from wealth to poverty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From good to bad, from bad to worst of all:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne doe their bodies only flit and fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But eeke their minds (which they immortall call)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still change and vary thoughts, as new occasions fall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ne is the water in more constant case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether those same on high, or these belowe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For th’Ocean moveth still from place to place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every River still doth ebbe and flowe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne any Lake, that seems most still and slowe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne Poole so small, that can his smoothnesse holde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When any winde doth under heaven blowe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which the clouds are also tost and roll’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now like great Hills, and streight like sluces them unfold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“So likewise are all watry living wights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still tost and turned with continuall change,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Never abiding in their stedfast plights:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fish, still floting, doe at random range,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And never rest, but evermore exchange</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their dwelling places, as the streames them carrie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne have the watry foules a certaine grange</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein to rest, ne in one stead do tarry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But flitting still doe flie, and still their places vary.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Next is the Ayre; which who feeles not by sense</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(For of all sense it is the middle meane)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To flit still, and with subtill influence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his thin spirit all creatures to maintaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In state of life? O weake life! that does leane</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On thing so tickle as th’unsteady ayre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which every howre is chang’d and altred cleane</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With every blast that bloweth, fowle or faire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The faire doth it prolong; the fowle doth it impaire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Therein the changes infinite beholde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to her creatures every minute chaunce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now boyling hot, streight friezing deadly cold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now faire sun-shine, that makes all skip and daunce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Streight bitter stormes, and balefull countenance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That makes them all to shiver and to shake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rayne, haile, and snowe do pay them sad penance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dreadfull thunder-claps (that make them quake)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With flames and flashing lights that thousand changes make.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Last is the fire; which, though it live for ever,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne can be quenched quite, yet every day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We see his parts, so soone as they do sever,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To lose their heat and shortly to decay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So makes himself his owne consuming pray:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne any living creatures doth he breed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all that are of others bredd doth slay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with their death his cruell life dooth feed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nought leaving but their barren ashes without seede.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thus all these fower (the which the groundwork bee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the world and of all living wights)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To thousand sorts of Change we subject see:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet are they chang’d (by other wondrous slights)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into themselves, and lose their native mights;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Fire to Ayre, and th’Ayre to Water sheere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Water into Earth; yet Water fights</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Fire, and Ayre with Earth, approaching neere:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet all are in one body, and as one appeare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“So in them all raignes Mutabilitie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How-ever these, that Gods themselves do call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of them do claime the rule and soverainty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Vesta, of the fire asthereall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vulcan, of this with us so usuall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ops, of the earth; and Juno, of the ayre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Neptune, of seas; and Nymphes, of Rivers all:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all those Rivers to me subject are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the rest, which they usurp, be all my share.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Which to approven true, as I have told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vouchsafe, O Goddesse! to thy presence call</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rest which doe the world in being hold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As times and seasons of the yeare that fall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the which demand in generall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or judge thyselfe, by verdit of thine eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether to me they are not subject all.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nature did yeeld thereto; and by-and-by</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bade Order call them all before her Majesty.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So forth issew’d the Seasons of the yeare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First, lusty Spring, all dight in leaves of flowres</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That freshly budded and new bloosmes did beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(In which a thousand birds had built their bowres</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sweetly sung to call forth Paramours)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his hand a javelin he did beare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on his head (as fit for warlike stoures)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A guilt engraven morion he did weare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That as some did him love, so others did him feare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then came the jolly Sommer, being dight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In a thin silken cassock coloured greene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was unlyned all, to be more light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on his head a girlond well beseene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He wore, from which, as he had chauffed been,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sweat did drop; and in his hand he bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A boawe and shaftes, as he in forrest greene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had hunted late the Libbard or the Bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now would bathe his limbes with labor heated sore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then came the Autumne all in yellow clad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As though he joyed in his plentious store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Laden with fruits that made him laugh, full glad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he had banisht hunger, which to-fore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had by the belly oft him pinched sore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his head a wreath, that was enrold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With ears of corne of every sort, he bore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his hand a sickle he did holde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To reape the ripened fruits the which the earth had yold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lastly, came Winter cloathed all in frize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Chattering his teeth for cold that did him chill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whil’st on his hoary beard his breath did freese,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the dull drops, that from his purpled bill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As from a limbeck did adown distill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his right hand a tipped staffe he held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which his feeble steps he stayed still;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he was faint with cold, and weak with eld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That scarse his loosed limbes he hable was to weld.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>These, marching softly, thus in order went;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after them the Monthes all riding came.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First, sturdy March, with brows full sternly bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And armed strongly, rode upon a Ram,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The same which over Hellespontus swam;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet in his hand a spade he also hent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in a bag all sorts of seeds ysame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which on the earth he strowed as he went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fild her wombe with fruitfull hope of nourishment.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Next came fresh Aprill, full of lustyhed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wanton as a Kid whose home new buds:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a Bull he rode, the same which led</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Europa floting through th’Argolick fluds:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His hornes were gilden all with golden studs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And garnished with garlonds goodly dight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the fairest flowres and freshest buds</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which th’earth brings forth; and wet he seem’d in sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With waves, through which he waded for his loves delight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then came faire May, the fayrest mayd on ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deckt all with dainties of her seasons pryde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And throwing flowres out of her lap around:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon two brethrens shoulders she did ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The twinnes of Leda; which on eyther side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Supported her like to their soveraigne Queene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lord! how all creatures laught when her they spide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And leapt and daunc’t as they had ravisht beene!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Cupid selfe about her fluttred all in greene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And after her came jolly June, arrayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All in greene leaves, as he a Player were;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet in his time he wrought as well as playd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That by his plough-yrons mote right well appeare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a Crab he rode, that him did beare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With crooked crawling steps an uncouth pase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And backward yode, as Bargemen wont to fare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bending their force contrary to their face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like that ungracious crew which faines demurest grace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then came hot July boyling like to fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all his garments he had cast away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a Lyon raging yet with ire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He boldly rode, and made him to obay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It was the beast that whylome did forray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Nemæan forrest, till th’Amphytrionide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him slew, and with his hide did him array.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behinde his back a sithe, and by his side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under his belt he bore a sickle circling wide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The sixt was August, being rich arrayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In garment all of gold downe to the ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet rode he not, but led a lovely Mayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth by the lilly hand, the which was cround</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With cares of corne, and full her hand was found:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was the righteous Virgin, which of old</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Liv’d here on earth, and plenty made abound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But after Wrong was lov’d, and Justice solde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She left th’unrighteous world, and was to heaven extold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Next him September marched, eeke on foote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet was he heavy laden with the spoyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of harvests riches, which he made his boot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him enricht with bounty of the soyle:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his one hand, as fit for harvests toyle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He held a knife-hook; and in th’other hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A paire of waights, with which he did assoyle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both more and lesse, where it in doubt did stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And equall gave to each as Justice duly scann’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then came October full of merry glee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For yet his noule was totty of the must,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which he was treading in the wine-fats see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of the joyous oyle, whose gentle gust</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made him so frollick and so full of lust:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a dreadfull Scorpion he did ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The same which by Dianaes doom unjust</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Slew great Orion; and eeke by his side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had his ploughing-share and coulter ready tyde.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Next was November; he full grosse and fat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As fed with lard, and that right well might seeme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he had been a fatting hogs of late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That yet his browes with sweat did reek and steem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet the season was full sharp and breem:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In planting eeke he took no small delight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereon he rode not easie was to deeme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For it a dreadfull Centaure was in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The seed of Saturne and faire Nais, Chiron hight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And after him came next the chill December:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet he, through merry feasting which he made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And great bonfires, did not the cold remember;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His Saviour’s birth his mind so much did glad.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon a shaggy-bearded Goat he rode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The same wherewith Dan Jove in tender yeares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They say, was nourisht by th’Idæan mayd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in his hand a broad deepe boawle he beares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which he freely drinks an health to all his peeres.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then came old January, wrapped well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In many weeds to keep the cold away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet did he quake and quiver, like to quell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And blowe his nayles to warme them if he may;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For they were numbd with holding all the day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An hatchet keene, with which he felled wood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from the trees did lop the needlesse spray:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon an huge great Earth-pot steane he stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From whose wide mouth there flowed forth the Romane Flood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And lastly came cold February, sitting</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In an old wagon, for he could not ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drawne of two fishes, for the season fitting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which through the flood before did softly slyde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And swim away: yet had he by his side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His plough and harnesse fit to till the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tooles to prune the trees, before the pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of hasting Prime did make them burgein round.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So past the twelve Months forth, and their dew places found.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And after these there came the Day and Night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Riding together both with equall pase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th’one on a Palfrey blacke, the other white;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Night had covered her uncomely face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a blacke veile, and held in hand a mace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On top whereof the moon and stars were pight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sleep and darknesse round about did trace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Day did beare upon his scepters hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The goodly Sun encompast all with beames bright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then came the Howres, faire daughters of high Jove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Night; the which were all endewed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With wondrous beauty fit to kindle love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But they were virgins all, and love eschewed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That might forslack the charge to them foreshewed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By mighty Jove; who did them porters make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of heavens gate (whence all the gods issued)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which they did daily watch, and nightly wake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By even turnes, ne ever did their charge forsake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And after all came Life, and lastly Death;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Death with most grim and griesly visage seene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet is he nought but parting of the breath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne ought to see, but like a shade to weene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unbodied, unsoul’d, unheard, unseene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Life was like a faire young lusty boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as they faine Dan Cupid to have beene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of delightfull health and lively joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deckt all with flowres, and wings of gold fit to employ.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When these were past, thus gan the Titanesse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Lo! mighty mother, now be judge, and say</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether in all thy creatures more or lesse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><b>Change</b> doth not raign and bear the greatest sway;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For who sees not that Time on all doth pray?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Times do change and move continually:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So nothing heere long standeth in one stay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherefore this lower world who can deny</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to be subject still to Mutability?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then thus gan Jove: “Right true it is, that these</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all things else that under heaven dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are chaung’d of Time, who doth them all disseise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of being: But who is it (to me tell)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Time himselfe doth move, and still compell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To keepe his course? Is not that namely wee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which poure that vertue from our heavenly cell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That moves them all, and makes them changed be?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So them we gods do rule, and in them also thee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom thus Mutability: “The things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which we see not how they are mov’d and swayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye may attribute to your selves as Kings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And say, they by your secret powre are made:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But what we see not, who shall us perswade?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But were they so, as ye them faine to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mov’d by your might and ordered by your ayde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet what if I can prove, that even yee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your selves are likewise chang’d, and subject unto mee?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And first, concerning her that is the first,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even you, faire Cynthia; whom so much ye make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Joves dearest darling, she was bred and nurst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On Cynthus hill, whence she her name did take;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then is she mortall borne, how-so ye crake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besides, her face and countenance every day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We changed see and sundry formes partake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now hornd, now round, now bright, now browne and gray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that ‘as changefull as the Moone’ men use to say.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Next Mercury; who though he lesse appeare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To change his hew, and alwayes seeme as one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet he his course doth alter every yeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And is of late far out of order gone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So Venus eeke, that goodly Paragone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though faire all night, yet is she darke all day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Phœbus selfe, who lightsome is alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet is he oft eclipsed by the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fills the darkned world with terror and dismay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Now Mars, that valiant man, is changed most;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he sometimes so far runnes out of square,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he his way doth seem quite to have lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cleane without his usuall spheere to fare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That even these Star-gazers stonisht are</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At sight thereof, and damne their lying bookes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So likewise grim Sir Saturne oft doth spare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His sterne aspect, and calme his crabbed lookes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So many turning cranks these have, so many crookes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But you, Dan Jove, that only constant are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And King of all the rest, as ye doe clame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are you not subjedt eeke to this misfare?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then, let me aske you this withouten blame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where were ye borne? Some say in Crete by name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Others in Thebes, and others other-where;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, wheresoever they comment the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They all consent that ye begotten were</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And borne here in this world; ne other can appeare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Then are ye mortall borne, and thrall to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unlesse the kingdome of the sky yee make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Immortall and unchangeable to be:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besides, that power and vertue which ye spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ye here worke, doth many changes take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And your owne natures change; for each of you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That vertue have or this or that to make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is checkt and changed from his nature trew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By others opposition or obliquid view.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Besides, the sundry motions of your Spheares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So sundry wayes and fashions as clerkes faine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some in short space, and some in longer yeares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What is the same but alteration plaine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Onely the starry skie doth still remaine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet do the Starres and Signes therein still move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And even itselfe is mov’d, as wizards saine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all that moveth doth mutation love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore both you and them to me I subject prove.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Then, since within this wide great Universe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nothing doth firme and permanent appeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But all things tost and turned by transverse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What then should let, but I aloft should reare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Trophee, and from all the triumph beare?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now judge then, (O thou greatest goddesse trew)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">According as thy selfe doest see and heare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto me addoom that is my dew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is, the rule of all, all being rul’d by you.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So having ended, silence long ensewed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nature to or fro spake for a space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with firme eyes affixt the ground still viewed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Meane-while all creatures, looking in her face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Expecting th’end of this so doubtfull case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did hang in long suspence what would ensew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whether side should fall the soveraine place:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At length she, looking up with chearefull view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The silence brake, and gave her doome in speeches few.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“I well consider all that ye have said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And find that all things stedfastnesse do hate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And changed be; yet, being rightly wayd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They are not changed from their first estate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by their change their being do dilate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And turning to themselves at length againe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do worke their owne perfection so by fate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then over them Change doth not rule and raigne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But they raigne over Change, and do their states maintaine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Cease therefore, daughter, further to aspire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thee content thus to be rul’d by mee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thy decay thou seekst by thy desire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But time shall come that all shall changed bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from thenceforth none no more change shal see.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So was the Titanesse put downe and whist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Jove confirm’d in his imperiall see.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then was that whole assembly quite dismist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Natur’s selfe did vanish, whither no man wist.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="mutability-canto-8" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</span>
					</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="title" xml:lang="la">Unperfite</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>When I bethink me, on that speech whyleare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Mutabilitie, and well it way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me seemes, that though she all unworthy were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the heav’ns rule; yet, very sooth to say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In all things else she bears the greatest sway.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which makes me loath this state of life so tickle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And love of things so vaine to cast away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose flowring pride, so fading and so fickle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Short Time shall soon cut down with his consuming sickle.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then gin I thihke on that which Nature said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that same time when no more Chance shall be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But stedfast rest of all things, firmly stayd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the Pillours of Eternity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is contrayr, to Mutabilitie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all that moveth doth in Change delight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But thenceforth all shall rest eternally</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Him that is the God of Sabaoth hight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O that great Sabaoth God, grant me that sabaoths sight.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
